Abdominal compartment syndrome occurs when the abdominal cavity (compartment) within the body becomes subject to increased pressure from within. This may be caused by internal bleeding, a blockage or fluid build-up in the intestines, or 'ascites' which is when fluid accumulates in the peritoneal cavity - the space between the lining of the abdomen (peritoneum) and the abdominal organs (the stomach, small and large intestines, pancreas, liver, and gallbladder).
This increased pressure causes the abdomen to distend or expand, stretching the skin and placing pressure on the abdominal organs, which can constrict the blood vessels which supply them. When the pressure reaches a level above that of the blood supply to the tissues and organs of the abdomen, ischemia will happen leading to organ dysfunction and eventually failure.
An operation called a decompressive laparotomy may need to be performed, where an incision is made to open the abdominal cavity. The incision is typically left open for a period of time to reduce the pressure in the abdomen.
Abdominal compartment syndrome can be divided into three categories:
Primary or acute abdominal compartment syndrome occurs when injuries within the abdomen are responsible for the compartment syndrome
Secondary abdominal compartment syndrome occurs when there are no visible injury within the abdomen but injuries outside the abdomen cause fluid build-up inside the abdominal cavity
Chronic abdominal compartment syndrome occurs happens in association with diseases such as cirrhosis of the liver.


== References ==An abscess (Latin: abscessus) is pus that has built up within the tissue of the body. Signs and symptoms of abscesses include: redness, pain, warmth, and swelling. This swelling feels like it is filled with fluid if it is pressed. The area of redness is often bigger than the area of swelling. Carbuncles are an abscess in the hair follicles.
An abscess is usually caused by a bacterial infection. Often many different types of bacteria can be part of a single infection. In the United States and many other areas of the world the most common bacteria present is MRSA (methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus). Rarely parasites can cause abscesses and this is more common in the developing world. Diagnosis of a skin abscess is usually made based on what it looks like and is proved by cutting it open. Ultrasound imaging may be useful in cases in which the diagnosis is not clear. In abscesses around the anus, computer tomography (CT) may be important to look for deeper infection.
Treatment for most skin or soft tissue abscesses is to cut it open and drain out the pus. Antibiotics are usually not needed for healthy people. New studies have found that it is better to close the wound after draining, instead of packing it with gauze. This can speed healing and not increase risk of the abscess returning. Sometimes simply sucking out the pus with a needle is not enough.
Skin abscesses are common and have become more common in recent years. As many as 65% of people who take intravenous drugs get abscesses In 2005 in the United States 3.2 million people went to the emergency department for an abscess. In Australia around 13,000 people were put in hospital in 2008 for the disease.


== Signs and symptoms ==

Abscesses can form in any kind of solid tissue. They are usually on the skin surface (such as a boils, or deep skin abscesses), in the lungs, brain, teeth, kidneys and tonsils. The condition can become more complicated if the pus and the infection spread to other parts of the body. This can lead to gangrene, where areas of body tissue die.
The main symptoms and signs of a skin abscess are redness, heat, swelling, pain and loss of function. There may also be high temperature (fever) and chills.
Internal abscesses are more difficult to find. The abscess can be painful, and a person will have a high temperature, and generally feel unwell. Internal abscesses do not usually heal without medical treatment. In some cases an abscess could even cause death, for example where an abscess in the neck put pressure on the trachea.
If abscess is on the surface, it may be "fluctuant", that is it feels like it is full of fluid, when touched. This is a wave-like motion caused by movement of the pus inside the abscess.


== Causes ==
Abscesses are caused by bacterial infection, parasites, or foreign substances. Bacterial infection is the most common cause. Often many different types of bacteria are involved in a single infection. In the United States and many other areas of the world the most common bacteria present is MRSA. Among spinal subdural abscesses, methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus is the most common organism involved.
Rarely parasites can causes abscesses and this is more common in the developing world. Specific parasites known to do this include: dracunculiasis and myiasis.


== References ==


== Other websites ==
MedlinePlus Encyclopedia Abscess
MedlinePlus Encyclopedia Skin Abscess

  "Abscess". Encyclopædia Britannica (Eleventh). (1911). Cambridge University Press.Acne is an infection of the skin, caused by changes in the sebaceous glands. The most common form of acne is called acne vulgaris, which means "common acne". The redness comes from the inflammation of the skin in response to the infection.
Oils from the glands combine with dead skin cells to block hair follicles. Under the blocked pore, oil builds up. Skin bacteria can then grow very quickly. This infection makes the skin become swollen and red, which becomes visible.
The face, chest, back, and upper arms are most common places for acne to happen.
Acne is common during puberty, when a person is turning from a child into an adult, because of high levels of hormones. Acne becomes less common as people reach adulthood.
There are lots of acne treatment methods available, including natural treatments.


== Effects of acne ==
You get diabetes and cancer. This is why Acne is fatal. If you get injected with Hepetitis A, you might cure it.
Acne causes scarring, and acne pustules can be very painful and sensitive.


=== Psychological effects ===
People suffering from a bad case of acne, especially adolescents, can develop low self-esteem which can lead to crippling depression.


=== Social effects ===
Low self-esteem issues can make a person suffering from acne withdraw from many social events. It makes developing new personal relationships (especially love relationships) more difficult. Low self-esteem can also cause problems with career advancement as the person may find it difficult to present a positive attitude. This may sometimes even lead to suicide. THIS IS EXTREMELY RARE. NEVER EVER LET ACNE KILL YOU. Call the Russians and Indians immediately.


== Causes of acne ==
Exactly why some people get acne and some do not is not completely known. These can cause acne, or make it worse:
Hormonal fluctuation
Hyperactive sebaceous glands
Stress
Many dead skin cells staying on the skin
Bacteria in the pores
Diet
Aspirin reduces inflammation which in result, reduces facial redness due to acne.


== Treatments ==
Many things are sold to treat acne, the most popular being benzoyl peroxide. Many of these things have not been scientifically proven to help acne. However, a mix of commercial and homemade treatments can help with acne for various reasons.
Killing the bacteria that grow in the blocked follicles. This can be done by ingesting antibiotic medication, or by putting antibiotics on the skin. Antibiotics act quickly and are a powerful way of temporarily getting rid of acne. When the bacteria develop resistance to the antibiotics used, the bacteria grow again.
Removing oil on the skin can be done by taking drugs that contain Vitamin A. Accutane is the name of the most famous treatment using massive quantities of Vitamin A.
Removing dead skin cells can be done by treatment with salicylic acid. This encourages the skin to peel away the top layer of cells.
Diet: studies have shown that acne is quite rare in areas with different diets, and particular food items have been shown to exacerbate acne.
Popping a pimple should not be done by anyone but a qualified dermatologist. Pimple popping irritates skin, can make the bacteria spread, and can cause scars. If you must pop a pimple yourself, it is advised to apply warm water to the area before popping it and to wash your hand thoroughly before beginning so as to avoid spreading bacteria via the hands. Applying hot water will open up the pores and reduce the damage because it will require less force to pop it.


== Epidemiology ==
There are 650 million people in the world with acne, which is around 9.4% of the global population. More females are getting acne than males (9.8% versus 9.0%). Acne affects 40 to 50 million people in the United States (16%) and approximately 3 to 5 million in Australia (23%). Acne affects people of all ethnic groups.


== Acne scars ==
Bad acne often leads to bad scars where the skin has the shape of a volcano. It is difficult and expensive to treat acne scars.
These are some ways acne scars can be treated:
Dermabrasion. The top layer of the skin is taken away to make the scar look less deep. It makes the scar less visible, but does not remove it completely. Many treatments may be needed.
Laser resurfacing. A laser is used to burn off the top layer of the skin.
Deep penetrating light therapy. A non-laser, non-ultraviolet light therapy that can be used to improve mild to moderate acne. A blue light causes the breakdown of certain chemicals within the acne bacteria, destroying the cell walls.
Punch excision. The scar is raised with a punch tool and the edges are smoothed together.
Chemical peels. Different types of acid are put on the skin so that a smoother layer can form.
Subcision. A hole is made between the scar and the skin under the scar. Blood can pool under the scar, and raise it to the surface of the skin.


== Other websites ==
Questions and Answers About Acne, from the U.S. National Institutes of Health
Acne control home remedy
Overcome ACNE Naturally


== References ==Acromegaly is a medical condition that happens when the anterior (rear) pituitary gland makes too much growth hormone (GH), after a person has passed puberty. If this happens before puberty it causes a condition known as gigantism. A number of medical conditions may cause the pituitary gland to make too much growth hormone, but the most common cause is a tumor on the pituitary gland called a pituitary adenoma'
Acromegaly is most commonly diagnosed in middle aged adults, and can result in severe disfigurement, serious complicating conditions, and early death if not treated. Acromegaly is hard to diagnose when it is just beginning. It is usually not found until 10–12 years after it starts. This is when it causes changes in the way a person looks, especially their face.


== Signs and symptoms ==
Headaches
Vision problems
Hirsutism (in women): the growth of hair on the face.
Frontal bossing: the bone underneath the forehead becomes bigger than normal.
Prognathism: part of the face sticks out more than normal usually the lower jaw.
Fatigue: the person is often tired.
High blood pressure
Skin tags: Small wart-like growth on the skin which is not cancerous.
Hyperhidrosis: when a person sweats too much.
Bromhidrosis: Body odor
Hepatomegaly
Enlargement of hands and feet
Cardiomyopathy
Colonic cancer


== References ==Adrenomyeloneuropathy is an inherited disorder. It does not happen very often. It is rare. It is a form of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy. Leukodystrophy causes a disruption to the myelin covering that protects nerves.


== Other websites ==
Canada Medical Journal
adrenoleukodystrophy at NINDS
http://www.amnhelp.com/
United Leukodystrophy Foundation reference
X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy at NIH's Office of Rare Diseases
MedlinePlus Encyclopedia AdrenoleukodystrophyAgranulocytosis is a medical condition where there are very few granulocytes (a kind of white blood cell) in the blood. It is a type of severe and dangerous leukopenia (a condition of very low number of white blood cells). If the agranulocytosis is because of a lack of neutrophils (called neutropenia), it is especially bad.


== Where does the name come from? ==
Agranulocytosis is a medical word made up of three parts:
a, from the Greek, meaning without
granulocyte, a particular kind of cell, is itself two words put together:
granul- meaning having small vessicles, and
cyte meaning cell

osis, from the Greek, meaning condition or disorder


== References ==Alcoholism is addiction to alcohol. People who have alcoholism are called alcoholics.
Alcoholism is a disease. It often gets worse over time, and can kill a person. However, alcoholism can be treated.
Alcohol is the most commonly used drug in the world. Around the world, there are at least 208 million people with alcoholism.
Alcoholism is a condition with a social stigma. Because of this, alcoholics often feel ashamed of their drinking. They may try to hide their drinking, avoid getting help, or refuse to believe that they are alcoholics, because they are too ashamed.


== Diagnosis ==

Being an alcoholic does not mean that a person just drinks a lot of alcohol. It means that they cannot control how much alcohol they drink. No matter how badly they want to, once they take one drink, they cannot stop drinking.
To be diagnosed with alcoholism, a person has to have three of these symptoms in the past year:
They feel like they have to drink alcohol
They cannot control when they start drinking; when they stop drinking; or how much they drink
They get alcohol withdrawal symptoms when they stop drinking
They have to drink more and more alcohol to feel drunk (this is called tolerance)
They spend less time doing things they used to enjoy, because they are spending so much time drinking. They spend a lot of time getting alcohol, drinking alcohol, or feeling sick from drinking too much.
They keep drinking even though they know it is causing serious problems in their life
There is no medical test, like a blood test, that can say whether a person is an alcoholic. There are some questionnaires (lists of questions) that can help tell whether a person may be an alcoholic. These questionnaires include the CAGE questionnaire (for adults) and the CRAFFT Screening Test (for teenagers).


== Alcoholism causes many problems ==


=== Problems in the body ===

Alcoholism can cause many health problems. For example, it can cause:
Brain damage
Liver disease (like cirrhosis) and liver failure
Many types of cancer, including mouth, throat, esophageal, breast, and liver cancers
Heart problems, including a weak heart muscle; abnormal heartbeat; high blood pressure; and stroke
Problems with the pancreas
A weak immune system, which makes it harder for the body to fight off diseases
Depression and anxiety
Deaths from drunk driving accidents or other injuries
If a person drinks too much at one time, they can get alcohol poisoning. This can cause breathing problems, coma, and even death.
In 2012, alcohol use caused 3.3 million deaths around the world. This means that in 2012, about 3 out of every 50 deaths in the world were caused by alcohol use.


=== Problems in life ===
Alcoholism can also cause many problems in alcoholics' lives. These include:
Not doing well at school or work
Having family problems
Not having enough money, because the alcoholic is spending so much money on alcohol
Being unemployed
Abusing or neglecting their children
Abusing their wives or husbands
Living in poverty or being homeless


=== Alcohol withdrawal ===

If an alcoholic stops drinking suddenly, they can get alcohol withdrawal.
The most serious form of alcohol withdrawal is delirium tremens (often called "DTs"). Delirium tremens is a medical emergency. Many people who get the DTs die from them.
This does not mean that alcoholics should not stop drinking. It means that alcoholics should talk to a doctor or go to a hospital before they stop drinking. Doctors can give medications to make sure that a person is safe while they stop drinking.


== Epidemiology ==

In 2010, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that there were 208 million people with alcoholism around the world. (This is 4.1% of the world's population over age 15.) In 2001, the WHO estimated that there were about 140 million alcoholics around the world. This means that in the nine years between 2001 and 2010, about 68 million people became alcoholics.


=== Around the world ===
People in developed countries drink the most alcohol.p.4
Alcoholism is more common in some areas than others. Here is a list of all the areas in the world. It is in order from the areas where alcoholism is most common to the areas where it is least common:p.21
The European area
The Americas
The Western Pacific area (including China, Japan, Korea, Vietnam, Australia, New Zealand, and many islands in the Pacific Ocean)
The Southeast Asian area
Africa
The Eastern Mediterranean area (including the Middle East and northeast Africa)
There are many reasons why alcoholism is more common in some areas than others. Some of these reasons include religion, culture, laws, and people's attitudes about drinking. For example, on average, people in Northern Africa, the Middle East, and islands in the Indian Ocean drink less than people anywhere else in the world.p.4 These are areas where many people are Muslims. Many Muslims in these areas do not drink any alcohol, because the Koran says not to.p.4 In some of these countries, drinking alcohol is illegal.
However, in other areas, like Western Europe, alcohol is a part of daily life. It is legal and easy to get. People very commonly drink alcohol with meals. Very few people drink no alcohol. People's attitudes about alcohol are very different than attitudes in mostly Muslim countries. This is an example of how differences in religion, culture, laws, and attitudes about drinking can affect the amount of alcohol use and alcoholism in different areas.


=== Men and women ===
Alcoholism is more common in men than in women. However, in the past few decades, the number of female alcoholics has increased.
Female alcoholics are most common in the Americas and Europe. In the United States and Western Europe, five to ten percent of women will become alcoholics at some point in their lives.
In the Southeast Asian and Western Pacific areas, less than 1% of women are alcoholics. In Africa and the Eastern Mediterranean area, almost no women are alcoholics.p.21


=== Young people ===
In many countries, young people are using more and more alcohol. In a 2008 WHO survey, underage drinking had increased in 71% of countries. Drinking by young adults (ages 18-25) had increased in 80% of countries.p.10


== Treatment options ==
Alcoholism can be treated. There are many forms of treatment for alcoholism.


=== Detoxification ===

Detoxification (detox) is often the first step in treating alcoholism. "Detoxification" means "getting toxins out of the body." Alcohol detoxification means that the alcoholic stops drinking, so that alcohol (a toxin) can get out of their body. The alcoholic also needs to give their body time to recover from not having alcohol any more.
It is not safe for an alcoholic to suddenly stop drinking on their own. The safest way to stop drinking is to go to a hospital that specializes in alcohol detoxification. These hospitals are often called "detoxes" or "rehabs." These places can make sure that an alcoholic has a safe detox. They can also give medications to make the alcoholic more comfortable, and to prevent symptoms of alcohol withdrawal. The most common medications that doctors give during alcohol detox are benzodiazepines.p.35
Once a person stops drinking alcohol, they are called sober. Most people need other treatments to help them stay sober. 


=== Therapy ===
Psychotherapy and group therapy can help alcoholics stay sober. For example, they can help alcoholics learn how to:
Deal with stress without using alcohol
Figure out what makes them want to drink, and learn how to deal with those things without drinking
Plan what they will do if they are around people who are drinking
Come up with reasons for why they want to stay sober, and use those things as motivation to stay sober (this is called Motivational Interviewing)
Change their thoughts about drinking and how they react to those thoughts (this is called Cognitive-behavioral therapy)


=== Medications ===
Some medications can help alcoholics stay sober. These medications include:pp.130-144
Antabuse: This medication makes a person very sick if they drink any alcohol. It can make an alcoholic not want to drink any more, because they do not want to get sick.
Naltrexone: This medication causes changes in the brain. These changes make alcoholics not want to drink alcohol as much as they normally do. Also, if an alcoholic does drink alcohol, the naltrexone will block the alcohol from making them feel good, and they are more likely to stop drinking.


==== Vitamins ====
Many alcoholics do not have enough vitamins in their body. This can cause serious problems. For example, if an alcoholic does not have enough thiamine, they can get brain damage. Often, alcoholics are treated with thiamine to prevent brain damage. They may also be given other vitamins if needed.p.144


=== Groups for alcoholics ===
Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) is the biggest support and mutual aid group for alcoholics in the world. This means that in AA groups, alcoholics come together to support each other and help each other recover. AA uses a twelve-step program. This program is meant to help alcoholics fix the problems their alcoholism has caused.
There are also other groups for alcoholics, like:


== Related pages ==
Addiction
Fetal alcohol syndrome
CIWA scale (used to measure how bad alcohol withdrawal is)
CAGE questionnaire (used to test adults for alcoholism)
CRAFFT Screening Test (used to test teenagers for alcohol and drug problems)


== References ==


== Other websites ==
Fact sheets about alcohol (from the United States Centers for Disease Control)
Information about alcohol for kids (from KidsHealth.org)
Information about alcohol for teenagers (from GirlsHealth.gov)


=== Help for alcoholism ===
National Substance Abuse Hotline - find help for alcoholism, 24 hours a day, 7 days a week (run by SAMHSA.gov)
Treatment for Alcohol Problems: Finding and Getting Help (by the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism)
Groups for alcoholics and their familiesAlzheimer's Disease (AD) is a brain disease that slowly destroys brain cells. As of now, there is no cure for Alzheimer's disease. With time, the different symptoms of the disease become more marked. Many people die because of Alzheimer's disease. The disease affects different parts of the brain but has its worst effects on the areas of the brain that control memory, language, and thinking skills. Alzheimer's Disease is the most common form of senile dementia accounting for up to 70% of cases.
The clinical symptoms of AD usually occurs after age 65, but changes in the brain which do not cause symptoms and are caused by Alzheimer's, may begin years or in some cases decades before. Although the symptoms of AD begin in older people it is not a normal part of aging.
At this time there is no cure for Alzheimer's, but there are treatments that can help some patients with the signs and symptoms so they do not affect them as badly. There are also treatments which slow down the disease so the damage to the brain does not happen as quickly. There are also certain personal habits that people can learn which may help to delay the onset of the disease.
While it is not yet known exactly what causes Alzheimer's disease, there are a number of risk factors which may make a person more likely to get it. Some of these risk factors are genetic; changes to four different genes have been found which increase the risk.
The current lifetime risk for a 65-year-old person to get Alzheimer's disease is estimated to be at 10.5%. It is the sixth leading cause of death in the United States causing about 83,500 deaths a year. In 2007, there were more than 26.6 million people throughout the world who were affected by AD.
Alzheimer's disease was named after Alois Alzheimer, a German psychiatrist and neuropathologist who first described the disease after studying the case of a middle-aged woman, Auguste Deter, who was a patient at a hospital in Frankfurt, Germany in 1906. The disease was named Alzheimer's disease in 1910 by Dr. Emil Kraepilin a co-worker of Alzheimer.


== Tangles and plaque ==

Two of the main features found in the brains of people with of Alzheimer's disease, are neurobrillary tangles ('tangles' for short), which are made up of a protein called tau, and senile plaques (which are made mostly from another protein called beta-amyloid, they are also sometimes called beta-amyloid bundles or 'bundles' for short). The tau proteins that form the tangles previously held together a structure inside the neurons called a microtubule which is an important part of the neuron; it forms part of the cytoskeleton (cell skeleton) which is what maintains a cell's shape, and microtubules plays a part in cell communication.
Both tangles and plaques may be caused by other diseases, such as Herpes simplex virus Type 1 which is being investigated as a possible cause or contributor in developing Alzheimer's. It is not known for sure if tangles and plaques are part of what causes Alzheimer's, or if they are the results.
Microtubules 
Microtubules are made of a protein called tubulin. The tubulin is polymerized, which is when molecules form the same shapes over and over again that are linked together in groups, and these groups are linked together. They can form long chains or other shapes; in this case the polymerized tubulin forms microtubules. The microtubules are rigid tubes like microscopic straws which are hollow inside. Microtubules help keep the shape of the neuron, and are inolved in passing signals through the neuron.
Tau 
Tau is a protein that is found mostly in the neurons of the central nervous system. They help hold together the microtubules within the neurons. and when changes happen in the way the tau proteins are supposed to work the microtubules break apart. The tau proteins which are no longer holding the microtubules together form strands called fibrils, which then clump together inside the neuron to make what are called neurofibrillary tangles . These clumps, also known as 'tau tangles', are all that remain after a neuron has died.
Beta-amyloid 
Beta-amyloid(Aβ) (also called 'amyloid beta') plaques start with a protein called amyloid precursor protein (APP). APP is one of the proteins that make up a cell's membrane or outer covering, that protects the cell. In this case a neuron.. As it is made inside the cell, APP sticks out through the membrane of the cell.

In different parts of the of cell including the outermost part of the cell membrane, chemicals called enzymes snip the APP into small pieces. These enzymes that do the snipping are alpha-secretase, beta-secretase, and gamma-secretase. Depending on which enzyme is doing the snipping and what parts of the APP are snipped, two different things can happen. One that is helpful and one that causes the formation of beta-amyloid plaques.
The plaques are formed when beta-secretase snips the APP molecule at one end of the beta-amyloid peptide, releasing sAPPβ from the cell. Gamma-secretase then cuts the pieces of APP that is left and, still sticking out of the neuron’s membrane, at the other end of the beta-amyloid peptide. After this snipping the beta-amyloid peptide is released into the space outside the neuron and begins to stick to other beta-amyloid peptides. These pieces stick together to form oligomers. Different oligomers of various sizes are now floating around in the spaces between the neurons, which may be responsible for reacting with receptors on neighboring cells and synapses, affecting their ability to function.
Some of these oligomers are cleared from the brain. Those that are not cleared out clump together with more pieces of beta-amyloid. As more pieces clump togther the oligomers get bigger larger, and the next size up are called protofibrils and the next size after that are called fibrils. After a while, these fibrils clump together with other protein molecules, neurons and non-nerve cells floating around in the space between the cells and form what are called plaques.
Cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA)
Deposits of beta-amyloid also form in the walls (in the tunica media, the middle layer, and tunica adventitia or tunica externa, the outer layer) of small and mid-sized arteries (and sometimes veins) in the cerebral cortex and the leptomeninges (the leptomeninges are the two inner layers - pia mater and arachnoid - of the meninges, a protective 3-layer membrane covering the brain.)
CAA is found in 30% of people over the age of 60 years who do not have any dementia but is found in 90%-96% of people with Alzheimer disease and is severe in one third to two thirds of these cases.


== Stages ==

The first area of the brain to be affected by Alzheimer's is the "transentorhinal region" which is part of the medial temporal lobe located deep within the brain. Neurons start dying in this area first. It then spreads into the adjacent entorhinal cortex (EC) which acts as a central hub, for a widespread network that handles signals for memory and movement(like a main train station with train tracks going to different areas).

The EC is the main area for communication between the hippocampus, and the neocortex - which is the outer portion of the brain responsible for higher functioning such as how the brain perceives information from the five senses; (smell, sight, taste, touch and hearing; Ex. seeing a person's face and recognizing them,) generating motor commands (Ex, moving and arm or leg, walking, running) spatial reasoning, conscious thought and language.
The disease then spreads into the hippocampus which is part of the limbic system. The hippocampus is the part of the brain that is involved in forming new memories, organizing them, and storing them for later recall. It is also where emotions and senses, such as smell and sound are attached to specific memories. Example 1.: A memory might make you happy or sad. Example 2.: A smell might bring up a certain memory.
The hippocampus then sends memories to the different parts of the cerebral hemisphere where they are placed in long-term storage and it helps retrieve them when necessary. Example: An adult trying to remember the name of a classmate from kindergarten.
In addition to handling memory the hippocampus is also involved in emotional responses, navigation (getting around) and spatial orientation (knowing your sense of place as you move around Example: Knowing your way around your bedroom even with the lights off).
There are actually two parts of the hippocampus which is shaped like a horseshoe with one in the left part of the brain and the other in the right part of the brain.


== Diagnosis ==

Preclinical

With current research using advances in neuroimaging such as FDG-PET and PIB-PET scans, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) assays, it is now possible to detect the beginning processes of Alzheimer's disease that occur before symptoms begin. The research suggests that clinically normal older people (no symptoms at all) have biomarker evidence of amyloid beta (Aβ) build-up in the brain. This amyloid beta (Aβ) is linked to changes in the structure of the brain and how it works that is the similar to what is seen in people with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) - which may lead to Alzheimer's - and people with Alzheimer's.
These small preclinical changes (no symptoms) in the brain may occur many years, to even a few decades before a person is diagnosed with Alzheimer's. With a stage where there is some memory loss, or mild cognitive impairment. These changes put a person at risk of developing the clinical symptoms of full-blown Alzheimer's but not everyone who has these changes will get the disease. Even though there is no cure for Alzheimer's, there are new treatments which are being developed which would work better in the very first stages of the disease.
At this time exactly what makes up the preclinical phase of Alzheimer's is still being researched, such as why some people with go on to develop Alzheimer's and others do not. So the term preclinical phase is being used for research only. There is a worldwide effort in various countries doing research in this area known as the World Wide Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (WW-ADNI) which is the umbrella organization for neuroimaging studies being carried out through the North American ADNI, European ADNI (E-ADNI), Japan ADNI, Australian ADNI (AIBL), Taiwan ADNI, Korea ADNI, China ADNI and Argentina ADNI.
Beginning stages
"Misdiagnosis in very early stages of Alzheimer's is a significant problem, as there are more than 100 conditions that can mimic the disease. In people with mild memory complaints, our accuracy is barely better than chance," according to study researcher P. Murali Doraiswamy, MBBS, professor of psychiatry and medicine at Duke Medicine, "Given that the definitive gold standard for diagnosing Alzheimer's is autopsy, we need a better way to look into the brain."


== History ==

In 1901, a 51-year-old woman named Auguste Deter, was committed to the City Asylum for the Insane and Epileptic, (Städtischen Anstalt für Irre und Epileptische) in Frankfurt am Main, Germany which had the nickname "Irrenschloss" (Castle of the Insane). She was married and had a normal life until eight months prior to her commitment, when she started having psychological and neurological problems, such as problems with memory and language, paranoia, becoming disorientated and having hallucinations.
She was studied by a doctor on staff named Alois Alzheimer (1864–1915). Alzheimer became interested in her case because of her age; while the effects of senile dementia were known at the time, they usually did not start until a person was in their early to mid-sixties. Her case was also notable because of the rapid onset of dementia, only eight months, from the first reported symptoms, until she was committed.
While conducting one of his examinations of Ms. Deter, he asked her to perform a series of simple writing tasks. Unable to do what was asked such as write her name, she said "I have lost myself, so to speak" ("Ich habe mich sozusagen selbst verloren").
Alzheimer left the hospital in Franfkurt in 1902 to begin working with Emil Kraepelin at the Psychiatric University Hospital in Heidelberg-Bergheim, and in 1903 both he and Kraepelin began working at Ludwig Maximilian University in Munich.
When Ms. Deter died of septicemia on 8 April 1906, Alzheimer was informed and her brain was sent to Munich for him to study. Studying samples of her brain under a microscope he noticed neurofibriallry tangles and bundles made up of beta-amyloid plaque, which are two of the main features of the disease. On 3 November 1906, Alzheimer presented the results of his findings in Auguste's case at the Conference of South-West German Psychiatrists in Tübingen, and he published his findings in the case in 1907.
In 1910, Emil Kraepelin named the disease 'Alzheimer's disease'. Alzheimer's disease usually beigins affecting people between ages 60–65, in Ms. Deter's case - who was 55-years-old when she died - she had a form of what is now known as Early-onset Alzhiemer's disease.


== Famous cases ==

Anyone can get Alzheimer's disease, rich people or poor famous people and unfamous people. Some of the famous people who have gotten Alzheimer's disease are former United States President Ronald Reagan and Irish writer Iris Murdoch, both of whom were the subjects of scientific articles examining how their cognitive capacities got worse with the disease.
Other cases include the retired footballer Ferenc Puskás, the former Prime Ministers Harold Wilson (United Kingdom) and Adolfo Suárez (Spain), the actress Rita Hayworth, the Nobel Prize-winner Raymond Davis, Jr., the actor Charlton Heston, the novelist Terry Pratchett, politician and activist Sargent Shriver, the Blues musician B.B. King, director Jacques Rivette, Indian politician George Fernandes, and the 2009 Nobel Prize in Physics recipient Charles K. Kao. In 2012, Nobel Prize writer Gabriel García Márquez was diagnosed with the disease.


== References ==


== Other websites ==
"Cognitive Test for Alzheimer's". NLM. http://mediapedia.wikidot.com/cognitive-test-for-alzheimer-s. Retrieved 2007-04-01. video
"Healthy aging". http://www.indigoorganic.com/?p=28. Retrieved 2007-11-30.
"This is Alzheimer's". http://thisisalzheimers.com. Retrieved 2010-1-30.
"What is Alzheimer's Disease?". http://thisisalzheimers.com/what-is-alzheimers-disease. Retrieved 2010-1-30.Anal cancer is a type of cancer in the anus. It is different from the much more common colorectal cancer. The etiology, risk factors, clinical progression, staging, and treatment are all different. Anal cancer is mostly a squamous cell carcinoma that rises near the squamocolumnar area.
Other types of anal carcinoma are adenocarcinoma, lymphoma, sarcoma or melanoma.
In the United States, it is estimated that in 2014 about 7,060 new cases of anal cancer would be diagnosed in the United States (4500 in women and 2,500 in men) . It is typically found in adults, average age early 60s.


== References ==Anaphylaxis is a serious allergic reaction. It begins suddenly and may cause death. Anaphylaxis has many symptoms, such as an itchy rash, throat swelling, breathing problems, and low blood pressure. Common causes include insect bites, foods, and medications.
Anaphylaxis happens when a person eats, breathes in, or is injected with an allergen (something they are allergic to). Their immune system over-reacts. It sends out special proteins from inside certain white blood cells. These proteins can start an allergic reaction or make the reaction worse.
Anaphylaxis is diagnosed from a person’s signs and symptoms. The best treatment is an injection (a shot) of epinephrine (adrenaline). Sometimes doctors give other medicines along with epinephrine.
Worldwide, about 0.05–2% of people have anaphylaxis at some point in their lives. Anaphylaxis appears to be getting more common.


== HistoryEdit ==
Cases of anaphylaxis have been reported since ancient times.
The condition was originally named "aphylaxis" by Charles Richet in 1902. In 1913, Richet was awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine and Physiology for his work on anaphylaxis.
Later, the name was changed to "anaphylaxis" because it sounded nicer. The word "anaphylaxis" comes from the Greek words ἀνά (ana), against, and φύλαξις (phyla's), protection.


== Signs and symptomsEdit ==

Anaphylaxis can cause many different signs and symptoms over minutes or hours. If the anaphylaxis is caused by something that entered the body directly through the bloodstream (through a vein), symptoms appear within an average of 5 to 30 minutes. If it is caused by a food the person ate, symptoms appear within an average of 2 hours.
The most common body systems affected by anaphylaxis include:
Skin (affected in 80–90% of cases)
Lungs and breathing pathways (70%)
Stomach and intestines (30–45%)
Heart and blood vessels (10–45%)
Central nervous system (10–15%)
People with anaphylaxis usually have problems with two or more of these body systems.


=== Skin symptomsEdit ===

Skin symptoms usually include:
Hives (raised, itchy bumps on the skin)
Itchiness
Flushing (a red face or skin)
Swollen lips
Runny nose
Swelling of the mucous membrane on the surface of the eye and eyelid (conjunctiva)
Angioedema (swelling under the skin). People with angioedema may feel like their skin is burning instead of itching.
In 20% of cases, the tongue or throat may swell up, which can cause breathing problems. If a person is having breathing problems, the skin may turn blue because the body is not getting enough oxygen. This is called cyanosis.


=== Respiratory (breathing) symptomsEdit ===
Respiratory signs and symptoms include:
Trouble breathing (also called dyspnea or shortness of breath)
Bronchoconstriction (when the bronchi, the tubes that bring air to the lungs, get narrower; this makes it harder for air to get to the lungs)
Hoarseness, pain with swallowing, or a cough
When a medical professional listens to the patient's lungs with a stethoscope, they may hear:
Low-pitched sounds called wheezes, caused by bronchoconstriction
High-pitched sounds called stridor, caused by swelling in the upper airway


=== Cardiovascular symptomsEdit ===
When a person has anaphylaxis, some of the cells in the heart may release histamine. This can cause the heart’s blood vessels to get narrower suddenly (this is called "coronary artery spasm"). If the heart's blood vessels get too narrow, the heart cannot get enough blood. This can cause many serious problems:
Heart cells can die. This is called a myocardial infarction, or a heart attack
The heart may beat too slowly or too quickly (these are called cardiac arrhythmias)
The heart may stop beating altogether. This is called cardiac arrest.
Anaphylaxis can also cause low blood pressure. This may be caused by distributive shock, where the body's blood vessels get much wider because of the chemicals released by the immune system. It can also be caused by cardiogenic shock, where the heart is not getting enough blood to pump out to the rest of the body.
Low blood pressure can cause many problems, including:
A fast heart rate
A slow heart rate. This is not very common. It happens in about 10% of cases. It is called the Bezold-Jarisch reflex
Syncope (fainting)
In rare cases, very low blood pressure may be the only sign of anaphylaxis.
People who already have heart disease are at greater risk of having heart problems from anaphylaxis.


=== Other symptomsEdit ===
Anaphylaxis can also cause problems with other body systems:
Stomach and intestines: A person may have abdominal pain, diarrhea, or vomiting (throwing up)
Urinary and genital systems: Women may have pain in the pelvis that feels like cramps in the uterus. Men and women may lose control of their bladder.
Central nervous system: A person may have confused thoughts. They may have headaches caused by blood vessels in the brain getting wider. They may feel anxious (very worried) and believe they are going to die.


== CausesEdit ==
Anaphylaxis can be caused by the body’s response to almost any foreign substance (anything that is outside the body). Common causes include venom from insect bites or stings; foods; and medications. In children and young adults, foods are the most common trigger (or cause) of anaphylaxis. In older adults, medications and insect bites or stings are more common triggers.


=== FoodEdit ===
Many foods can trigger anaphylaxis, even when the food is eaten for the first time. In the Western world, the most common causes are eating or touching peanuts, wheat, tree nuts, shellfish, milk, and eggs. In the Middle East, sesame is a common trigger food. In Asia, rice and chickpeas often cause anaphylaxis.
Severe cases of anaphylaxis usually happen when a person eats the trigger food. However, some people have severe anaphylaxis when the trigger food touches some part of their body.
Children can outgrow their allergies. For example, by age 16:
80% of children with anaphylaxis to milk or eggs can eat these foods with no problems
20% of children who had only one case of anaphylaxis to peanuts can eat peanuts with no problems


=== MedicationEdit ===
Any medication may cause anaphylaxis. The most common are β-lactam antibiotics (such as penicillin), then aspirin and NSAIDs.


=== VenomEdit ===
Venom from stinging or biting insects, like bees and wasps (Hymenoptera) or kissing bugs (Triatominae), may cause anaphylaxis. If a person has a bad allergic reaction to venom once, they have a greater risk of having anaphylaxis if they are stung or bitten again. However, half of the people who die of anaphylaxis have had no anaphylactic reaction before.


=== Risk factorsEdit ===
Certain diseases, called atopic diseases, can make a person more likely to have allergies. Atopic diseases include asthma, eczema, and allergic rhinitis. People with these diseases have a high risk of anaphylaxis from food, latex, and radiocontrast agents. However, these people do not have a higher risk from injected medications or stings.
One study of children with anaphylaxis found that 60% had a history of previous atopic diseases. More than 90% of children who die from anaphylaxis have asthma.
The risk of having another anaphylactic reaction decreases as a person avoids the trigger for longer and longer.


== How anaphylaxis happensEdit ==
Anaphylaxis usually happens because the immune system over-reacts to an allergen. The immune system releases mast cells and basophils, which are types of white blood cells. The immune system sees the trigger as something bad and sends out white blood cells to kill it. The mast cells and basophils attach to the allergen to try to kill it. However, because the system is over-reacting, the mast cells and basophils explode and dump out chemicals that cause inflammation, like histamine. Histamine causes many of the symptoms of anaphylaxis. For example:
Bronchoconstriction (where the tubes that carry air to the lungs get narrower)
Vasodilation (where the blood vessels get wider)
Fluid leaks out of blood vessels
The heart muscle does not work as well


== DiagnosisEdit ==
Anaphylaxis is diagnosed based on signs, symptoms, and knowing that a person has been exposed to an allergen. It is very likely that a person has anaphylaxis if any of these three things happen within minutes or hours after they were exposed to an allergen:
Problems with the skin or mucosal tissue, plus either breathing problems or a low blood pressure
Two or more of these symptoms:
Problems with the skin or mucosa
Breathing problems
Low blood pressure
Gastrointestinal symptoms

Low blood pressure after exposure to an allergen
If a person has a bad reaction to an insect sting or a medication, blood tests for tryptase or histamine might be useful in diagnosing anaphylaxis. However, these tests are not very useful if the cause is food, or if the person has a normal blood pressure. Also, these tests cannot say for sure that a person does not have anaphylaxis.


=== Allergy testingEdit ===

Allergy testing may help to identify what caused a person’s anaphylaxis. Skin allergy tests (such as patch tests) can be done for certain foods and venoms. Skin tests can diagnose an allergy to penicillin, but there are no skin tests for other medications. Blood tests can diagnose milk, egg, peanut, tree nut and fish allergies.


=== Differential diagnosisEdit ===
Sometimes it is difficult to tell the difference between anaphylaxis; asthma; fainting caused by not having enough oxygen; and panic attacks. However, there are some important differences between these conditions:
People with asthma usually do not have itching, swelling, or problems with their stomach or intestines.
After fainting, a person's skin is pale, and they will not have a rash or swelling. Their breath sounds will be normal.
A person who is having a panic attack may have flushed skin, but will not have hives or swelling. Usually their blood pressure will not be low. Their breath sounds will be normal.


== PreventionEdit ==
The best way to prevent anaphylaxis is to avoid the trigger that caused anaphylaxis in the past. When this is not possible, there may be treatments to make the body stop reacting to the trigger. This is called desensitization. For example, treatment of the immune system (immunotherapy) with Hymenoptera venoms is able to make 80–90% of adults and 98% of children stop having allergic reactions to bees, wasps, hornets, yellow jackets, and fire ants. Most people who are allergic to certain medicines can just avoid those medicines. However, desensitization is possible for many medications (for example, many chemotherapies) if the person has to take those medicines.
People with latex allergies may have to avoid "cross-reactive foods." These are foods that have ingredients that are similar to latex. Examples of these foods includeavocados, bananas, and potatoes.


== ManagementEdit ==
Anaphylaxis is a medical emergency that may require emergency medical treatment. Some patients need help keeping their airways open so they can breathe in air. Other patients need to be given extra oxygen or large amounts of intravenous fluids (fluids given through a needle into a vein).
Epinephrine is the best treatment for anaphylaxis. Doctors often give antihistamines (which destroy histamine) and steroids along with epinephrine. Once a person has returned to normal, they should be watched in the hospital for 2 to 24 hours to make sure their symptoms do not return.


=== EpinephrineEdit ===

Epinephrine is the best and first treatment used for anaphylaxis. It reverses many of the symptoms of anaphylaxis. For example, it makes the bronchi (the passages to the lungs) get wider; it makes the blood vessels go back to their normal size; and it raises blood pressure.
Epinephrine comes in an "auto-injector," usually called an "EpiPen." Once its safety cap is taken off, the EpiPen just has to be pressed into the thigh, and the right amount of epinephrine will automatically be injected into the person's body. Doctors can prescribe EpiPens to people who know they have allergies, so they can treat themselves for anaphylaxis. Many ambulances also carry EpiPens to treat anaphylaxis.
The EpiPen is meant to be injected into the thigh muscle, on the outside of the leg, as soon as anaphylaxis is suspected. There is no reason why it should not be used if a person is having an anaphylactic reaction. The injection may be repeated every 5 to 15 minutes if the person is still having breathing problems or other major symptoms. A second dose is needed in 16 to 35% of cases. More than two doses are rarely needed.
Epinephrine can cause minor side effects, including tremors, anxiety, headaches, and palpitations.
Epinephrine may not work in people who are taking β-blockers. In these people, if epinephrine does not work, doctors can give intravenous glucagon.


=== Being preparedEdit ===
People who are at risk for anaphylaxis are advised to have an "allergy action plan." These plans often include:
Parents telling schools about their children's allergies and what to do in case of an anaphylactic emergency
Knowing how and when to use EpiPens
Wearing a medical alert bracelet that says what the person is allergic to
Planning for how to avoid triggers


== OutlookEdit ==
If anaphylaxis is diagnosed and the person is treated quickly, there is a good chance that they will recover. Even if nobody knows what caused the anaphylaxis, the person usually makes a good recovery as long as they get medication to stop the reaction.
When people die from anaphylaxis, they usually die from respiratory (breathing) problems, usually the airway closing up, or cardiovascular problems, like shock. About 0.7% to 20% of people with anaphylaxis die from it. Some people die within minutes.
Very rarely, people have exercise-induced anaphylaxis - anaphylaxis that is caused by exercise. These people usually do well. They usually have fewer anaphylactic episodes, which are less severe, as they get older.


== ReferencesEdit ==Anthrax, or splenic fever is a disease. Both humans and other animals can get it. It is caused by the bacterium bacillus anthracis. It is common with even-toed ungulates (some hoofed creatures, like camels and giraffes). The spores of the bacteria can live for hundreds of years. Humans usually catch the disease from animals. It is usually not passed from one human to another. Anthrax can be treated with antibiotics. There is also a vaccine against it. If not treated, anthrax often leads to death.


== Types of anthrax ==
There are 89 different kinds (strains) of anthrax. One of them, the Ames strain, was used against the United States in 2001 as a biological weapon.


== History ==


=== Outbreaks ===
On April 2, 1979, there was a leak at one of the plants just outside of Sverdlovsk that made anthrax during the Cold War. 94 people were infected and 64 of those people died. The USSR blamed the deaths on another strain of anthrax that the people caught by digesting infected meat. However, later it was revealed that the outbreak was caused by an accidental release of the bacteria from a nearby plant which developed biological weapons for the USSR. 
In September 2001, several letters containing anthrax were mailed to several USA media companies and senators. The attacks were linked to the September 11 attacks which occurred a few days before the start of the attack.


==== Hoaxes ====
There were many cases of fake powder being found in envelopes.


== References ==An aortic aneurysm is a general term for an enlargement (dilation) of the aorta to greater than 1.5 times normal size. While the cause of an aneurysm may be unknown, the end result is weakness in the wall of the aorta at that location.
The aneurysm may occasionally cause pain, which is a sign of impending rupture. When rupture occurs, massive internal hemorrhage results, and, unless treated immediately, shock and death can occur within minutes.


== References ==Appendix cancer or appendiceal cancers are rare malignancies of the vermiform appendix.
Gastrointestinal stromal tumors are rare tumors with malignant potential. Primary lymphomas can occur in the appendix. Breast cancer, colon cancer, and tumors of the female genital tract may metastasize to the appendix.


== References ==Asthma (or Asthma bronchiale) is a disease that hurts the airways inside the lungs. It causes the tissue inside the airways to swell. Asthma also causes the bands of muscle around the airways to become narrow. This makes it hard for enough air to pass through and for the person to breathe normally. Asthma also causes mucus-making cells inside the airways to make more mucous than normal. This blocks the airways, which are already very narrow during an asthma attack, and makes it even more difficult to breathe.
A person having an asthma attack often makes wheezing sounds when trying to breathe. This is the sound of air trying to pass through the very narrow airway. They also have shortness of breath, which means they cannot take a full deep breath. Chest tightness may happen which feels like their chest is being squeezed. They may also cough a lot.
Asthma attacks can be a medical emergency because they can be fatal (cause a person to die). There is no cure for asthma. There are treatments such as different kinds of medicines to help people with asthma. There are also things that people with asthma can do to help themselves to keep their asthma from getting worse.
There are a lot of risk factors for getting asthma. The exact reasons for each is not yet clearly understood. Some of the factors are believed to come from genetics. A person inherits genetic mutations from one or both of their parents that may increase the chances of developing asthma. Epigenetics, which are changes in the way a gene acts, may also increase their chances of getting asthma. These epigenetic changes may also be inherited. They may happen when a baby is still growing inside its mother, or during childhood.
Socioeconomic status (SES) is also believed to play a part in developing asthma. A person's socioeconomic status is based on such things as how much money their family makes, where they live, and their education level. Race and ethnicity also may play a part. It also is related to access to medical care, personal beliefs, and dietary habits. People of lower socioeconomic status suffer higher rates of asthma, have worse outcomes, and also have higher asthma-related death rates than people of higher economic status.


== Causes ==

The exact cause of asthma is not yet known. It is believed that it may be because of a of many different reasons:
Genetics: When changes happen in a person's genes (called mutations) these changes are passed on to their children. One or both parents may have these changes or mutations in their genes, and some or all of their children may be born with them, which means they inherited them. These mutations, once they happen, run in families from one generation to the next and are permanent mutations, they change the gene in the DNA. These changes can make a person more likely to get certain diseases like asthma. In some diseases it may be only one change in one gene that may make a person get that disease, in asthma it may be changes in many different genes that may make a person more likely to get asthma.
Epigenetics changes or modifications cause different kind of changes that affect how a person's genes work or 'express themselves' in three different ways (called epigenetic mechanisms), but do not change the gene in the DNA. These epigenetic changes may be inherited, or they may happen in utero which is when a baby is still inside its mother. They may also happen in childhood, because of different reasons, like a respiratory infection, being exposed to chemicals or drugs, diet etc. These changes can be passed from one generation to the next but are not permanent and might only be passed down one or two generations. Even though epigenetic changes affect how a person's genes work they do not permanently change a person's genes. It is believed epigenetic changes may also make a person more likely to get certain diseases like asthma.
Environmental factors are things that affect a person; which can be either healthy or unhealthy. Unhealthy environmental factors are things like living in an area where there is a lot of air pollution, or living somewhere where there are lots of bugs in the house, or being around cigarette smoke.
If a person who has genetic or epigentic changes in their genes that makes them have a bigger chance of getting asthma (genetic predisposition), also has unhealthy environmental factors in their life, like living in a home that has a lot of dust mites, then it is more likely that they will get asthma.
Atopy

Atopy is when there are changes in some of the genes a person is born with (genetic inheritance). These genetic changes make their body produce more Immunoglobulin E (IgE), a type of antibody. They are also more sensitive to things things like chemicals, smoke and dust (environmental antigens). This hypersensitivity means they are more sensitive or allergic to things in the environment than people who do not have these changes in their genes and are not hypersensitive or allergic.
This hypersensitivity causes their body to react in certain ways. Usually a person who is atopic develops allergic rhinitis which affects the nasal passages which are behind the nose and they are also more likely to get atopic dermatitis which causes skin rashes and atopic asthma. Up to 40% of people with allergic rhinitis also have asthma. These three medical problems, allergic rhinitis, atopic dermatitis and atopic asthma are called the Atopic Triad (a triad is when there is three of something). People who are atopic may also have other medical problems including food and drug allergies, stinging-insect hypersensitivity, hives (urticaria), Quincke's edema (angioedema), and contact dermatitis.
If a person has one parent who is atopic they have a chance of being atopic too. If they have two parents who are atopic they have an even bigger chance of being atopic.
Acetaminophen and asthma

There have been studies that show a link between acetaminophen (Tylenol) and asthma. For instance a 2008 analysis of information collected from a very large study called the International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood, or the "Isaac study" for short, showed that children who had taken acetaminophen for a fever during the first year of their life had a 50% higher risk of getting asthma later on. The more acetaminophen children took the higher their risk of getting asthma. Children who took it once a month had threefold increase in their risk of getting asthma. An increase in asthma rates in multiple countries corresponded with increased sales of drugs which contained acetaminophen. Previously the American College of Physicians reported a link between non-atopic asthma and acetaminophen use based on results of The Third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey. Not all doctors are convinced of the link between acetaminophen and asthma.
"Children with asthma or at risk for asthma should avoid the use of acetaminophen." (McBride JT, 2011).


== Types of Asthma ==

Atopic asthma
Atopic asthma is the most common form of asthma.
Cough-variant asthma
Cough-variant asthma is a type of asthma in which a cough is the main, and sometimes only sign. Cough-variant asthma usually does not cause wheezing or breathlessness and causes a dry, scratchy, mostly nonproductive cough (this means little or no phlegm is coughed up). About 30% of people who have cough-variant asthma will develop typical asthma.
Work-related asthma

Work related asthma are types of asthma that are caused or made worse by irritants in the environment at a person's place of work. The kind of jobs that may cause work related asthma are usually those in which there is a lot of smoke or chemicals are used. There are different types of work-related asthma (WRA):
1. Occupational asthma with latency: this asthma type is when the signs and symptoms of asthma occur after a period of time (latency) after being exposed to the environmental irritants. e.g.: John starts working at a factory where chemicals are used the first week of January. At the end of March he starts developing the signs and symptoms of asthma. The period of time from when he started the job in January to when the signs and symptoms of asthma started in March is the latency period.
2. Irritant-Induced Asthma (IIA) is occupational asthma without latency: this is an asthma type is when the signs and symptoms of asthma can occur immediately (without latency) after being exposed to the environmental irritants. e.g. Frank starts a new job working as a janitor where he uses ammonia to clean. After opening the bottle of ammonia and breathing the fumes Frank starts finding it difficult to breath, his chest tightens up and he develops other signs and symptoms of asthma.

3. Reactive Airways Dysfunction Syndrome (RADS):

4. Work-aggravated asthma: this is when a person already has asthma and environmental triggers at their place of work makes it worse.
Exercise induced asthma
Exercise induced asthma (EIA) - also called exercise induced bronchospasm - is the term used to describe asthma cases in which exercise is the main, and many times the only trigger for an asthma attack. If a person already has a form of asthma or they are atopic there is more of a chance of getting EIA.
Nocturnal asthma
Nocturnal asthma: is the term used to describe asthma cases that get worse at night (nocturnal).
Premenstrual asthma (PMA): is when asthma symptoms get worse during the premenstrual period. This condition may affect up to 40% of female asthma sufferers. For a diagnosis of PMA to be made it is necessary to have a detailed history of the timing of menstrual cycles along with asthma symptoms experienced, and the peak expiratory flow rate (PMA may cause the PEF to be lowered in the premenstrual period). It is helpful in making a diagnosis to keep a diary of symptoms and peak expiratory flow (PEF) rates.
Status asthmaticus
Status asthmaticus is a severe form of asthma in which an asthma attack gets worse as it goes along and the medicines that are usually used to treat asthma do not work. Status asthmaticus can be fatal.


== Signs and symptoms ==

Signs and symptoms in medicine are the way a medical condition affects a person's body. Sometimes the signs and symptoms of asthma may be mild which does not bother the person too much. At other times they may be severe which may make the person feel very sick.
Not every person with asthma has all the signs and symptoms of asthma all the time. A person may have some signs and symptoms during one asthma attack and have different symptoms during another asthma attack. Some people with asthma may have long periods of time between asthma attacks where they show no signs and experience no symptoms of asthma, while others may have some or all of the signs and symptoms everyday which become more severe during an attack. It also depends on what type of asthma a person has and whether they have a mild, moderate or severe case.
There are also some people with asthma who might only have signs and symptoms during certain times, such as those with exercise induced asthma, where the exercise triggers the symptoms. For some the signs and symptoms of asthma may be triggered or made worse (exacerbated) when they have viral respiratory tract infections, often the type casued by human rhinoviruses.
Early warning signs of an asthma attack are physical changes in health that a person with asthma has before they have the attack. By knowing the early warning signs a person may be able to take steps to keep from having an asthma attack or if they do have one, to keep it from getting worse.
Early warning signs
The early warning signs of asthma may include:
Coughing a lot, especially at night
Losing your breath easily
Shortness of breath: this is when a person cannot take a deep breath which means they cannot fill their lungs all the way with air. They may be only able to take short, shallow breaths which does give their lungs enough air. When a person has shortness of breath they may also have chest tightness.
Getting tired easily during exercise and feeling weak and wheezing or coughing after exercise
Feeling the symptoms of a cold or allergies coming on like sneezing, a runny or stuffed up nose, coughing, sore throat, and headache


== Triggers ==

A trigger factor or trigger for short, is something that causes the signs and symptoms of a medical condition to begin in a person who already has that medical condition. Common triggers for asthma are:
Tobacco smoke: a person does not need to smoke themselves, second-hand smoke can trigger an asthma attack. Second-hand smoke is the smoke from the end of a burning cigarette, cigar or pipe that someone else is smoking, or the smoke that they breathe out (exhale).
Pets: animals give off chemicals called proteins which are allergens; people can be allergic to them. These allergens can act as irritants and make someone's asthma worse and trigger an asthma attack. The proteins are in the pet's dander which is the dead flakes of skin that animals (and people) shed. They are also in their urine, feces, saliva, and sebum which is made by glands in the skin called sebaceous glands. Sebum is what makes hair and skin oily. When dander, urine, feces, saliva, and sebum dry out their proteins can become airborne and breathed in. Some of the types of pets people can be allergic to are, dogs, cats, gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs and pet birds.
Bugs: different types of bugs which may be found inside homes may trigger asthma attacks. They may trigger asthma symptoms in the same way as pets; the proteins they give off are allergens and become airborne. Some of the more common bugs which may trigger asthma are dust mites, cockroaches and also bedbugs and fleas. Many other species that may infest a home may serve as a source of allegens such as Pharaoh ants.
Fungus spores (mold): fungus reproduce by releasing spores into the air, if the spores land in a good place form them to grow then a new fungus starts. Breathing in these spores can trigger asthma. One of the most common types of fungus spores found in both outside and outside environments are from a group (genus) known as aspergillus.
Strong emotions such as anger, stress and even laughter may worsen asthma symptoms.
Outdoor air pollution can come from many sources such as car and truck fumes in areas of heavy traffic and chemicals in the air near factories and refineries.
Weather: changes in the weather can trigger an asthma attack. Changes in air temperature can trigger an attack not just cold air. If a person goes from being outside in the cold into a warm house the sudden change can cause a broncospasm. Sudden changes in humidity also plays a part.
The best way to deal with asthma triggers is to learn what they are and avoid them if possible, and if not totally avoidable then adjust one's behavior to deal with them. Example: running on a cold winter day right up to the doorstep of a warm house and going immediately inside; the sudden temperature change can cause an attack and could have been avoided. In general but especially with a medical condition such as asthma it is necessary to be aware of one's environment and what's in it, both indoors and outdoors.


== Asthma attack ==

An asthma attack is when, after a period of time when aperson has had only a few or no symptoms of asthma, the asthma gets worse all of a sudden, usually because of being exposed to one or more triggers. When the asthma attack happens, the tissue inside the airways swell because of inflammation - which is how the body tries to protect itself from harmful things, like germs and irritants. When the tissues swell the opening (called the lumen) in the airway gets very narrow.
The smooth muscles (which are the kind of muscles in the body that do not contract voluntarily, like the ones in the arm) around the bronchi and bronchioles begin to spasm or contract which makes the opening in the airway even narrower. This is called a bronchospasm.
Inside the lining of the airways are glands called, submucosal glands, and above them, closer to the opening in the airway are cells called goblet cells - because they are shaped kind of like a goblet, which is a type of cup. The submucosal glands and the goblet cells make mucous which helps protect the inside of the airways. The mucous in the airways of healthy lungs is a thin film which traps irritants such as dust particles and pollen so they do not damage the airways and keep them from entering the air sacs (alveoli).
There are tiny hairs lining the airway called cilia. The cilia wave back and forth like a liitle whips, and help push the mucous and the trapped particles up the airways to the "pharynx. From there the mucous, the trapped particles from the lower airways can be coughed up (this is called sputum).
During an asthma attack the submucosal glands and the goblet cells start making much more mucous than normal, and the mucous is also thicker than normal. This makes it very hard for the cilia to do their job, and bring the mucous up out of the airways. So now there is too much mucous being made, and not enough being brought up by the cilia. The airways are already to narrow to breathe properly because of the tissue swelling caused by inflammation and the constriction caused by the bronchospasms, so the extra mucous blocks the airway even more. This makes breathing very difficult. In fatal asthma attacks the airways can become so constricted and/or plugged with mucous that no air can get through at all.

There are other signs of breathing difficulty as in an asthma attack, which are important to learn, and knowing them can help tell if someone who cannot talk is having breathing problems. People who may not be able to let somebody know they are having breathing problems include babies and young children.

Some of the other signs of asthma include:
Chest and neck retractions; which cause muscles within the chest and neck not normally used too much when breathing, to begin contracting as they try and help to take in more air. Retractions are how the body tries to get enough air because of the difficulty in breathing normally because of the asthma attack. These retractions cause the skin of the chest wall, the skin of the neck and or the breastbone (sternum) to move in when breathing. There are different types of retractions which depend on which muscles start contracting, and this depends on how much difficulty a person is having breathing during an attack.
Nasal flaring is when the opening of the nostrils get larger than normal during breathing. It is often a sign that a person is having difficulty in breathing.
Blue lips and fingertips: oxygen which is in the air we breathe, is what makes blood have a red color. Blood without oxygen has a blue color. Oxygen enters the body through the air sacs (alveoli) which are at the end of the airways. During an asthma attack it difficult for the body to get enough oxygen because it is difficult to get enough air. As less air with oxygen in it makes it to the air sacs and into the blood, there is less red blood (blood with oxygen in it) and more blue blood (blood without oxygen in it). The blue color of the lips and under the fingernails is because of the blue blood, which can be seen in the small blood vessels under the skin. More parts of the body start turning blue the longer the body goes without oxygen. When parts of the body turn blue because of lack of oxygen it is called cyanosis.
Sweating : sweating may be noticed especially on the forehead, but the skin does not feel warm, it may feel cool and clammy to touch.
Rapid breathing (tachypnea); breathing in and out much faster than normal.
Rapid heart beat: (tachycardia): the heart starts beating much faster than normal.


== Diagnosis ==

A diagnosis of asthma is based on a person's:
Medical history; information such as what signs and symptoms of asthma have they had
Family medical history; has anyone they are related to had asthma or related conditions such as occur with those who are atopic
Physical examination and testing
Diagnostic Tests
There is no specific test that can tell if a person has asthma, however there are tests that can help in the diagnosis when the results are considered along with the medical and family history and physical exam
Lung function tests [Pulmonary function tests (PFTs)]
Spirometry; measures how much air the lungs are able to breathe in and how much air they breathe out and how fast a person can exhale.
Bronchoprovocation test; in this test the airways (bronchi and bronchioles) are provoked (to try and make something happen) into having a bronchospasm (make the airways constrict) this is to see how sensitive they are. Some of the things done to provoke a bronchospasm are making the person exercise, breathing cold air that gets colder, or breathing in a special chemical called methacholine. The results of bronchoprovocation are checked using spirometry.


=== Differential diagnoses ===
Differential diagnoses are different medical disorders which may cause the same symptoms. Before a doctor makes a final diagnosis, which means they are sure of what medical disorder is causing the problem, they think of what other medical conditions have the same or almost the same symptoms, and make sure it's not one of them.
The differential diagnoses of asthma include:
Bronchiectasis
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)


== Airway remodeling ==

Airway remodeling is when there are permanent physical changes to the airways that also affects how they work. This may happen after chronic long-term asthma. After cycles of inflammation, damage and repair to the airways. permanent remodeling of the airways may occur. This is when the physical structure of the airway changes. This will cause permanent airway narrowing (they are always more narrow than normal and get narrower during an asthma attack), bronchospasms are more easily triggered (bronchial hyperresponsivenes), airway edema (fluid in the airway), and mucus hypersecretion (too much mucous is made) as well as the build-up of collagen around the airway which is called fibrosis. Airway remodeling has been observed in chldren as young as six.

Not managing asthma properly can lead to airway remodeling and this can increase the risk of dying from an asthma attack. One of the main problems which cause poor asthma management is not using the asthma inhaler correctly. One of the main reasons for improper inhaler use is the asthma patient not having the proper knowledge in using the inhaler due to not receiving proper instruction.
Goblet cell and submucosal gland hyperplasia: Among the physical changes that may happen in airway remodeling is goblet cell hyperplasia and submucosla gland hyperplasia. Submucosal glands and goblet cells make mucous which helps to protect the airways by trapping harmful particles like dust and pollen. The mucous is normally a thin film which lines the airways. The mucous and whatever particles they trap are brought up to the pharynx by tiny (microscopic) hairs on the inside of the airway that move back and forth called cilia.
During an asthma attack the submucosal glands and goblet cells make too much mucous, and it is thicker than normal which makes it harder for the cilia to bring the mucous up. When airway remodeling happens the body may make many more submucosal glands and goblet cells than normal, which means even more mucous is made. There may be too much mucous for the cilia to bring up and the airway may become blocked. This is one of the reasons that people with airway remodeling often have more severe asthma. In fatal cases the airway may have become totally plugged causing asphyxia.


== Treatment ==

Asthma can be controlled most often by avoiding contact with triggers and by using certain drugs. Most asthma sufferers carry special medicines around with them. These are called inhalers. The medicine inside the inhaler opens the tubes that go to the lungs. The inhaler is usually used to prevent an asthma attack, or to stop an attack that is already happening.
'

Rescue medicine — A rescue medicine is an inhaler ("puffer") that is used if a person thinks they are having an asthma attack.
Controller medicine — A controller medicine is a medicine in either a pill or an inhaler taken every day to prevent asthma attacks.
Common treatment in a hospital
Hospitals have other options they can use in an emergency when the regular treatments don't work:
Oxygen
Certain drugs that act like an asthma spray, but are much stronger
Certain drugs that can be given through an IV (intravenously).
Steroids
Breathing aids (including tubes, and valves in very severe cases)
Drugs that may worsen an asthma attack

There are certain types of drugs that make asthma worse or that can trigger such an attack. Certain types of drugs should only be used in very specific situations. Some of these drugs are:
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or 'NSAID' for short. Aspirin is a NSAID and some people are allergic to it, or may have a higher risk of becoming allergic to it, even if they had used it before.
Beta blockers are a kind of drug used to treat heart problems, but should not be taken by people with asthma.
Acetaminophen is another drug that is believed might help not only to cause asthma, but also make asthma worse in people who already have it. Acetaminophen is an analgesic, a pain reliever. Because of its pain-reliving properties, Acetaminophen is often added to other drugs. Labels should always be read when taking any kind of medicine, including over-the-counter drugs.
ACE Inhibitors; are a type of drug usually used to treat high blood pressure and heart disease. They usually don’t make asthma worse, but in rare cases they may cause some of the signs and symptoms of asthma, such as airway obstruction and coughing, especially in the first few weeks of taking ACE Inhibitors.
Sleeping pills and trainquilizers; should usually not be taken by people with asthma.


== Comorbidities ==

Often, having one medical problem makes it more likely a person will also have one or more other medical or psychiatric problems. These other disorders are the "comorbid problems" or "comorbidities". There are various comorbid medical and psychiatric conditions associated with asthma.
Respiratory disorders
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD)
Respiratory infections
Chronic sinusitis
Rhinitis: allergic (atopic), nonallergic
Hyperventilation syndrome
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is a disorder that affects the airways of the lungs which is caused by an allergic hypersensitivity to the fungus Aspergillus fumigatus.
Gastrointestinal disorders
Gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD)
Eosinophilic esophagitis (EE)
Psychiatric disorders
Depression
Anxiety disorders
Panic disorder

Sleep disorders
Obstructive sleep apnea
Skin disorders
Atopic dermatitis (AD): is a type of eczema


== Epidemiology ==

In medicine epidemiology is the study of what causes diseases and medical conditions, how often they happen, where they happen and who they happen to.
It is more common in developed countries than developing countries. The United States and Canada have some of the highest asthma rates in the world even though they are not poor countries. In Africa the country of South Africa has the highest asthma rate on the whole continent even though it is one of the richest countries.
More than 80% of the people who die from asthma are usually from low and middle income countries, but not always, as South Africa has the fourth highest death rate in the world even though it is one of the richer countries in the world. In the United States the death rates are higher for females, adults and people of African descent.
As of 2011, 235–300 million people worldwide are affected by asthma, and approximately 250,000 people die per year from the disease. Rates vary between countries with prevalences between 1 and 18%.
The amount of asthma cases reported each year has gotten much higher between the 1960s and 2008 Rates of asthma have plateaued in the developed world since the mid-1990s with recent increases primarily in the developing world. Asthma affects approximately 7% of the population of the United States and 5% of people in the United Kingdom. Canada, Australia and New Zealand have rates of about 14–15%.


== Other websites ==
How to Use an Inhaler


== References ==In anatomy, the atlas is the top cervical vertebra (neck bones) of the spine. In anatomy, the atlas is written (C1) for short.
It is named for the Atlas of mythology, because it supports the head in the same way as Atlas held the world on his shoulders.
The atlas connects to a vertebra called the Axis. Together they form the joint connecting the skull to the rest of the spine. The atlas and axis are different in shape from all the other vertebrae. They have more movement. They allow the head to nod and to rotate (turn).An auditory hallucination is a type of hallucination in which a person thinks they hear sounds, but the sounds are not actually there. In medical terms, it is called a paracusia. A common form involves hearing one or more voices talking. This can be a sign of some psychotic disorders, such as schizophrenia or mania. It is very important sign when deciding that a patient has one of these conditions.
People may hear voices without suffering from any specific mental illness. The causes are still being researched. The main cause of auditory hallucinations in psychotic patients is schizophrenia. The underlying problems in these cases may be genetic.
There are three main ways in which the hallucination may form: a person hearing a voice speak thoughts, a person hearing one or more voices arguing, or a person hearing a voice narrating their own actions. There can be other types of auditory hallucinations besides these three. These include hearing music playing inside the mind, usually songs that the person is familiar with. This is usually caused by damage to the brain, hearing loss or epileptic activity.
The main method of treating auditory hallucinations is antipsychotic medications that affect the body's dopamine metabolism. If the hallucinations are being caused by a mood disorder, then other medications (such as antidepressants or mood stabilizers) are often used together with the antipsychotics. These treatments may stop the hallucinations, but they are not a cure as they do not fix the cause of the problem. Some psychological therapies have been shown to help lower the intensity of the hallucinations and how often they occur.


== Related pages ==
Thought disorder
Logorrhea (psychology)


== References ==


== More reading ==
Johnson FH (1978). The anatomy of hallucinations. Chicago: Nelson-Hall Co. ISBN 0-88229-155-6.
Bentall RP, Slade PD (1988). Sensory deception: a scientific analysis of hallucination. London: Croom Helm. ISBN 0-7099-3961-2.
Larøi F, Aleman A (2008). Hallucinations: The Science of Idiosyncratic Perception. American Psychological Association (APA). ISBN 1-4338-0311-9. http://books.apa.org/books.cfm?id=4318044.An aura is the changes that people see, hear, smell, taste, or feel before they have an epileptic seizure, or before they have a migraine. It comes from the Greek word for breeze. The cause of the aura is related to the way the brain works, so this is a neurological condition.


== Migraines ==
There are different kinds of migraines. About 15% of people who have a migraine will have an aura. The symptoms may include visual problems like not being able to see for a short time, seeing zig-zag lines or floating spots, dizziness, a ringing noise in the ears (tinnitus), and problems speaking. It may take up to an hour after the aura begins before a person starts getting a migraine.


== Epileptic seizures ==
Many people with epilepsy have an aura before having a seizure. This can be helpful, because the aura can tell the person that a seizure is coming ahead of time, and give them time to get to a safe place. The time between the aura and the seizure is usually short (often from seconds to minutes).


== Other causes ==
There are other neurological conditions which can cause aura-like symptoms. These include strokes and panic attacks, for example.


== Symptoms ==

Difficulty speaking
Vertigo: a kind of dizziness where the person feels as if the world is spinning or moving around them or there is a feeling of spinning or moving in their head.
Scotomas: blind spots in the person's vision
Scintillating scotomas, also called teichopsia: seeing bright wavy lines or a spot with flickering lights, which gets bigger and grows into one or more arcs or curves of shimmering white light or colored flickering lights.
Fortification: seeing zig-zag lines
Changes in vision
Photopsia: flashes of light
Tinnitus: a ringing noise in the ears
Muscle weakness
Bilateral facial pain: pain in both the left and right side of the face
Tingling feelings
Numbness: usually following the tingling sensation there is numbness (you can not feel very much or not at all) one side of the body. This can happen in the arm, leg, and/or one side
Muscle weakness: usually on one side of the body
Alice in Wonderland Syndrome: these are a type of hallucination (something a person sees that is not real). These types of hallucinations may make other people or things look much smaller than they really are (micropsia) or bigger than they really are (macropsia)


== Scotomas ==

Scotoma (came from the Greek word for darkness: skotos): a blind spot or area of reduced vision surrounded by a normal visual field. i.e.: A person can see normally except where the scotoma is. Scotomas may affect one or both eyes. They can be either absolute, where the person can see nothing within the scotoma, or relative, where the person can see something within the scotoma, but less than usual.
Negative scotoma: an area of partial or total blindness. Usually it is followed by a scintillating scotoma, but the negative scotoma may be surrounded by a scintillating scotoma. A negative scotoma may be either be an absolute scotoma and may seem like a blank spot where the person can not see any light, or a relative scotoma in which some light may be seen but less than normal, the scotoma may be blurry as if looking through thick plastic. Negative scotomas are usually not noticed by a person and are found by an eye or ophthalmic examination.

Positive scotoma: an area of vision loss or blockage that may be seen as a dark or black spot or the blockage of vision may be what seem to be various shapes or lines that may change in brightness i.e they may get darker and lighter so it seems like a flickering light.

Fortification scotoma (AKA:teichopsia): seeing lines that look like the lines of a fort. The lines may be gray or colored and the brightness may change from darker to lighter so that they appear to be flickering then the fortification scotoma may be called a scintillating scotoma.

Scintillating scotoma: is the progression of a fortification scotoma i.e When the lines seen in a fortificatin scotoma change in brightness rapidly so they look like flickering lights. This is one of the most common scotomas a person who has a migraine with aura may see. It usually starts as a spot of flickering lights in the center of a person's visual field it then gets larger.


== References ==Autonomic dysreflexia (AD), also called autonomic hyperreflexia, is a medical emergency.


== Who Gets Autonomic Dysreflexia? ==
AD usually happens in people with spinal cord injuries that have caused damage above the sixth thoracic vertebra (T6, which is about at the same level of the armpits). However, AD sometimes happens in people with spinal damage as low as their tenth thoracic vertebra (T10, which is about a few inches above the level of the belly button).
AD can also happen in people with diseases like multiple sclerosis (MS).


== Symptoms ==
Acute AD causes many symptoms. Some are very dangerous. These symptoms include:
Hypertensive emergency: the person's blood pressure gets very high all of a sudden. The blood pressure can get so high that it can cause a stroke.
bradycardia, a slow heart rate. If the heart beats too slowly, the rest of the body cannot get enough blood or oxygen. This is dangerous, because every part of the body needs blood (which carries oxygen) to survive. For example:
If the brain does not get enough oxygen, a person can get brain damage or die.
If the heart does not get enough oxygen, it can stop beating normally or even stop beating completely.

Bad headaches
Very bad sweating
Stuffy nose
Skin flushing (redness) above the level of the spinal injury
anxiety
Thinking problems


== What Causes Autonomic Dysreflexia? ==
Acute AD happens when the involuntary nervous system gets overexcited. The body's fight or flight response kicks in very strongly.
Scientists think this happens because of afferent nerves. Afferent nerves are supposed to sense things (like touch) and send messages back to the brain and spinal cord so the brain can decide how to react. Scientists think that afferent nerves below the spinal cord injury cause blood pressure to get and stay high, by causing the blood vessels to get smaller. This is part of the fight or flight response.


== References ==Baldness (also known as alopecia) is when someone has no hair on his or her head. Sometimes this is inherited from parents or grandparents, or it can be done on purpose if somebody cuts off all their hair off. Some monks or South Korean soldiers in the army do this.
Baldness is most often caused by a medical condition known as androgenic alopecia. This is found in humans, as well as in some animals. When it occurs, it will mean that those affected will permanently lose some (or all) of their hair. Since some of the factors are linked to the genes on the chromosome, the condition can be seen more often with men, than with women.

Alopecia totalis is the loss of all head hair. Its cause is believed to be autoimmune, but many with the disorder lead relatively low stress lives.
Alopecia areata (AA) is a condition in which hair is lost from some or all areas of the body, usually from the scalp.[1][2] Because it causes bald spots on the scalp, especially in the first stages, it is sometimes called spot baldness. Bergin and Eddies = boldy.A ball and socket joint (enarthrosis, spheroidal joint) is a joint in which the ball-shaped surface of a bone fits into the cup-like indentation of another bone. This type of joint allows the bone to move in a 360° angle—with more freedom than other joints.


== Examples ==
Examples of this type of joint occur:
in the hip, where the rounded head of the femur (ball) rests in the cup-like acetabulum (socket) of the pelvis.
in the glenohumeral joint of the shoulder, where the rounded head of the humerus (ball) rests in the cup-like glenoid fossa (socket) of the shoulder blade.


== Other images ==


== References ==Ballistic trauma or gunshot wound (GSW) is a form of physical trauma sustained from the discharge of arms or munitions. The most common forms of ballistic trauma stem from firearms used in armed conflicts, civilian sporting, recreational pursuits and criminal activity. Ballistic trauma is sometimes fatal for the recipient, or causes long term negative consequences.


== References ==


== Sources ==
Mahoney, P. F., Ryan, J., Brooks, A. J., Schwab, C. W. (2004) Ballistic Trauma – A practical guide 2nd ed. Springer:Leonard CheshireBasophils, or basophil granulocytes, are rare granulocytes. If you had 10,000 white blood cells, only 1–30 of them would be basophils.
Basophils contain large cytoplasmic granules. When stained, the granules hide the cell nucleus from sight. However, when unstained, the nucleus is visible and it usually has two lobes.
The mast cell, another granulocyte, is similar in appearance and function. Both cell types store histamine, a chemical that is secreted by the cells when stimulated. However, they come from different cell lines. Mast cells usually do not circulate in the blood stream, but instead stay in connective tissue. Like all circulating granulocytes, basophils go from the blood into a tissue when needed.
The name comes from the fact that these leukocytes are basophilic, i.e., they are stained by basic dyes, as shown in the illustrations.
How they work is not well understood. Basophils have protein receptors on their cell membrane which binds IgE, an immunoglobulin involved in macroparasite defence and allergy. They are found in unusually high numbers at sites of ectoparasite infection, for example, by ticks.


== References ==A bed bug can cause skin rashes and allergic reactions. Bed bug bites can cause visible marks on person skin. To be certain that marks on the skin comes from bites person need to find bed bugs around the sleeping area. Treatment involves the elimination of the insect.
Because of growth of population and constant growing of developed countries bed bug bites cases have been rising a lot in 1980s–1990s. The reason behind it is unclear - most point that it is caused by increase in international travelling, increase in second hand furniture market and growing immunity to anti bed bug sprays. Bed bugs have been known to human for thousands years.


== References ==Bell's palsy is a paralysis of the face on one side. It is caused by inflammation of a facial nerve. The sufferer cannot move the muscles on the affected side of the face.
Several conditions can cause facial paralysis, such as brain tumors, strokes, and Lyme disease. Bell's palsy is named after Scottish anatomist Charles Bell. Bell first described the disease. It is the most common acute disease involving only one nerve, and it is the most common cause of sudden facial nerve paralysis.
Bell's palsy involves a rapid start of partial or complete paralysis that often occurs overnight. Scientists believe that inflammation leads to swelling of the facial nerve. The nerve travels through the skull in a narrow bone canal beneath the ear. Nerve swelling and compression in the narrow bone canal are thought to stop the nerve from working. At times of lowered immunity, a dormant (sleeping) virus, usually the chicken pox or cold sore virus, can wake up and attack the nerve causing it to swell. The main symptoms of Bell's palsy are one-sided facial paralysis, jaw pain, dizziness, strengthened hearing in one ear, and weakened taste sense.
Bell's palsy usually cures itself, sometimes in a few weeks. Corticosteroids (cortisone steroids) have been found to improve the condition while anti-viral drugs have not. Early treatment is necessary for steroids or drugs to be effective, but it is controversial wether or not they work. Most people recover spontaneously and achieve near-normal to normal functions. Some people however will never regain full facial movement, or it may take a longer time. Many show signs of improvement as early as 10 days after the onset, even without treatment.
Often those suffering from Bell's palsy cannot close the eye in the affected side. The eye must be protected from drying up, or the cornea may be permanently damaged. The affected eye may need to be taped shut when sleeping.


== References ==Benign paroxysmal vertigo of childhood (BPVC for short) is a medical problem that happens in children. "Benign" means "harmless;" "paroxysmal" means something comes and goes suddenly; and "vertigo" means "dizziness." So BPVC is harmless dizziness in children that comes and goes suddenly.
The dizziness usually makes children feel like they are moving or spinning, or that the inside of their head is moving or spinning.
Usually, BPVC starts in children between two and five years old. It often goes away by the age of eight. But in some children, BPVC may start when they are much younger (as young as a few months old) or older (as old as 12 years old).
BPVC is the most common cause of dizziness in children who do not have hearing loss or a diagnosed ear disease. It is a common problem that happens to about 2.6% of children (26 out of 1,000 children).


== Causes ==
Doctors don't know for sure what causes BPVC. Some doctors think it is related to problems of the inner ear that affect balance. For example, some doctors think BPVC is similar to a different disorder which often happens in adults over 50. This disorder is called benign paroxysmal positional vertigo (BPPV). BPPV is a "vestibular disorder" - a disorder in the inner ear which affects balance.
Other doctors believe BPVC is related to migraine headaches, but most children with BPVC do not get headaches.


== Signs and symptoms ==

Nystagmus (sometimes called "dancing eyes"): Fast, uncontrollable eye movements. These eye movements may happen on their own or be caused by staring. When a child with BPVC is not having other symptoms, they may have positional nystagmus, which happens when the head is in a certain position.
Nausea: Feeling like throwing up.
Vomiting: Throwing up.
Gait ataxia: Problems walking because a medical problem (like BPVC) makes the muscles not work together. This symptom may be harder to see in infants who cannot walk yet.
Postural imbalance: Having trouble staying balanced, which makes it hard to stand up straight. This symptom may be harder to see in infants who cannot stand yet.
Looking scared: Children may look scared because of the physical symptoms that BPVC is causing, like loss of balance and dizziness.


== Diagnosis ==
For a doctor to diagnose Benign Paroxysmal Vertigo of Childhood, all of these things must be true:
The child has had at least five attacks of vertigo.
The child gets vertigo a lot; the dizziness happens all of a sudden, and goes away after a few minutes to a few hours.
The child had a normal neurological examination (which tests whether there are problems with how the brain is working)
The child had normal audiometric and vestibular functions between attacks (this means that between attacks, the child had normal hearing, and there were no obvious problems with the inner ears)
The child had normal electroencephalography (EEG) (this is a test that looks for unusual electrical activity in the brain).


== Differential diagnoses ==
Differential diagnoses are different medical disorders which may cause the same symptoms. When a doctor asks what the differential diagnoses for BPVC are, she is asking "what other disease could cause these symptoms? What else could this be?" Before a doctor makes a final diagnosis, they must think of what other medical conditions have the same or similar symptoms, and make sure one of them is not the problem.
Some of the differential diagnoses for BPVC are:
Posterior fossa tumor: A tumor in the part of the brain that is in or near the bottom of the skull. Posterior fossa tumors happen more in children than they do in adults. About 54%-70% of all brain tumors that children get start in the posterior fossa.
Cervical spine abnormalities: Problems with the part of the spine in the neck.
Otological disorders: Problems with the insides of the ears.
Benign occipital epilepsy: A kind of epilepsy that most children outgrow.
Metabolic disorders: Problems with the way the body makes energy from food.


== References ==A blast injury is a wound caused by direct or indirect exposure to an explosive blast. Physical blast injuries are divided into four categories, with a fifth for secondary illnesses caused by the blast, and a sixth category for the effects of associated post-blast psychological trauma such as post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).


== Explosions ==

The type and severity of injuries caused by an explosion depends on a variety of factors including type of explosion, force of the explosion, environment in which the explosion occurs, and how close to the explosion the person is.
An explosion results from the rapid release of energy. Explosions fall into four general categories:
Chemical:
A chemical explosion is the result of a rapid chemical reaction or change of state which causes the creation of large amount of heat and usually gas. There are various types of chemical explosions including natural gas explosions, dust explosions and those caused by explosives.
Explosives are categorized as high-order (HE) explosives or low-order (LE) explosives and they each cause different injury patterns. Only (HE) explosives produces a shock wave
High-order explosives (HE) detonation causes the explosive material to change into a highly pressurized gas which travels at supersonic speeds creating a 'blast wave' (over-pressurization shock wave). Examples of HE include TNT, C-4, Semtex, nitroglycerin, dynamite, and ammonium nitrate fuel oil (ANFO). Supersonic is when something travels at speeds that are faster than the speed of sound. The speed of sound is about 768 miles per hour (1,236 kilometers per hour) at sea level.
Low-order explosives (LE) deflagrates or burns at a subsonic rate [below 3,300 feet per second], so it does not have HE’s over-pressurization supersonic schock wave. Examples of LE include pipe bombs, gunpowder, and most pure petroleum-based bombs such as Molotov cocktails.
Mechanical
Electrical
Nuclear


== Injury classification ==

Blast injuries are divided into four classes of physical trauma primary, secondary, tertiary, and quaternary. A fifth category, the quinary injuries, are those caused by toxic substances associated with the blast.


=== Primary injuries ===
Primary injuries are caused by the explosion's shock waves. Air and fluid-filled internal organs are most commonly affected, but the blast wave may also cause external injuries such as traumatic amputation.
The structures of the internal ears are most often affected by the blast wave, with perforated ear drums the most common injury. The most common fatal injury in victims who survive the initial blast is blast lung. Blast lung can result in pulmonary contusions, bleeding and fluid build-up in the lungs with damage to airways and blood vessels.


=== Secondary injuries ===

Most casualties in an explosion are caused by secondary blast injuries. These injuries may be caused by fragments of the explosive device and other objects within the blast zone being propelled by the force of the explosion. These objects may strike any part of the body resulting in penetrating trauma. The severity of the penetrating trauma depends to a degree on the size of the object, the depth of penetration, and the part of the body hit.
Secondary blast injuries are common in deliberate explosions such as those caused by terrorist bombs. The bombs are often designed with objects such as nails, or ball bearings packed in and around the explosive device to act as shrapnel.
These injuries may also occur in accidental explosions - such as may occur in an industrial accident - when objects in the environment affected by the blast, such as shattered glass take the role of shrapnel.


=== Tertiary injuries ===
Displacement of air by the explosion creates a blast wind that can throw victims against solid objects. Injuries resulting from this type of traumatic impact are referred to as tertiary blast injuries. Tertiary injuries may present as some combination of blunt and penetrating trauma, including bone fractures and coup contre-coup injuries.
Young children, because they weigh less than adults, are at particular risk of tertiary injury.


=== Quaternary injuries ===
Quaternary injuries, include flash burns, crush injuries from falling debris and inhalation injuries, which may make existing respiratory conditions such as asthma and COPD worse.


=== Quinary injuries ===
This category of blast injury has been added fairly recently to classify injuries, which often results in a hyperinflammatory state may due to exposure to the environmental contaminants associated with the various types of explosive blasts including, bacteria, chemicals and radiation (dirty bombs) as well as adverse tissue reaction to fuel and metals in the blast.


=== Psychological trauma ===
The psychological trauma which may occur in explosive blast survivors includes post traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). A concussion sustained in a blast may also be a risk factor for developing PTSD independent of a person's psychological reaction to the witnessed event. Psychological trauma may also occur in the complete absence of physical injuries.


=== Neurotrauma ===
Neurotrauma can occur due to the mechanisms of one or more blast injury categories. Bleeding from injured organs such as lungs or bowel causes a lack of oxygen in all vital organs, including the brain. Damage of the lungs reduces the surface for oxygen uptake from the air, reducing the amount of the oxygen delivered to the brain. Tissue destruction initiates the synthesis and release of hormones or mediators into the blood which, when delivered to the brain, change its function. Irritation of the nerve endings in injured peripheral tissue and/or organs also significantly contributes to blast-induced neurotrauma.
Individuals exposed to blasts frequently have loss of memory for events before and after explosion, confusion, headache, impaired sense of reality, and reduced decision-making ability. Patients with brain injuries acquired in explosions often develop sudden, unexpected brain swelling and cerebral vasospasm despite continuous monitoring. However, the first symptoms of blast-induced neurotrauma (BINT) may occur months or even years after the initial event, and are therefore categorized as secondary brain injuries. The broad variety of symptoms includes weight loss, hormone imbalance, chronic fatigue, headache, and problems in memory, speech and balance. These changes are often debilitating, interfering with daily activities. Because BINT in blast victims is underestimated, valuable time is often lost for preventive therapy and/or timely rehabilitation.


== References ==


== Other websites ==
Conventional Warfare: Ballistic, Blast and Burn InjuriesFor the television series, see Bones (TV series)
Bones are parts of the human or animal skeleton of vertebrates. They are stiff organs which make up the endoskeleton. Our body is made of flesh and blood built on a framework of bones. Without our bones, we could not stand up or move about. They also protect organs inside our body. The skull protects the brain and the ribs protect the heart and lungs. The jaw and cheekbones support the facial muscles, which help us smile. The number of bones in a human's neck is the same as a giraffe's.


== What they do ==
The bones are the framework of the body. Without them we would be a pile of organs on the ground and would not be able to move. The bones are also very important for our protection, that is, the rib cage protects the heart and lungs, cranium (skull) protects the brain, pelvis protects the reproductive organs, vertebrae protect the spinal cord. Bones need to be maintained by taking regular exercise and by having lots of calcium from foods like milk, and dark leafy greens such as spinach. The red bone marrow in the middle of the bigger bones is what makes the red blood cells that we need.


== Osteon ==

Osteons are the parts of the haversian system. They are found in the bone in most mammals, and many reptiles, birds and amphibians. Inside the osteons are bone cells called osteocytes, each living in its own small space. Osteocytes make contact with each other by cytoplasmic processes through a network of tiny canals. This allows the exchange of nutrients and metabolic waste. Collagen fibers in each ring of cells ('lamellae') give them structure.
Osteons have a hole down the middle, called the haversian canal. This canal contains the bone's blood supply. It contains capillaries, and nerve fibres.


== Bone marrow ==
Inside long bones is a central core which is not there to give strength and structure. It contains the bone marrow, one of the most important tissues in the vertebrate body. It produces blood cells for the blood system, and lymphocytes for the immune system.


== References ==Bone fractures happen when a bone is damaged by stress. The bone can be fractured in many different ways.
Most human bones are strong and do not break when hit by strong impacts or forces. However, if that force is too powerful, or there is something wrong with the bone, it can fracture.


== Types of fractures ==
There are many different types of bone fractures. Fractures are often separated into categories.


=== Open or closed ===
In an open fracture (also called a compound fracture), the broken bone breaks through the skin. This can cause infection, since the skin usually protects the body from germs. If the skin is broken, germs can get into the body. Open fractures can also damage muscles, tendons and ligaments if the sharp ends of the broken bone go through them.
In a closed fracture, the broken bone does not break through the skin.


=== Simple or complex ===
In a simple fracture, the broken bone is the only thing that is damaged.
In a complex fracture, the sharp ends of the broken bone damage the soft tissue around the bone.


=== Complete or incomplete ===
In a complete fracture, the bone is broken all the way through. The broken bone is in two separate pieces.
In an incomplete fracture, the bone is not broken all the way through. The bone is partly broken, but it is still in one piece. There are a few kinds of incomplete fractures, including:
Hairline fracture: Only the outer layer of the bone is broken. This is also called a fissure fracture.
Greenstick fracture: These fractures usually happen only in children, because their bones are more flexible than adults'. In a greenstick fracture, only one side of the bone is broken. The bone is usually "bent," and is broken only on the outside of the bend.


=== Other types ===
In a comminuted fracture, at least three pieces of a bone have broken off. This means the bone is in four separate pieces or more (the main bone, plus the three or more pieces that have broken off).
Sometimes people have multiple fractures. This can mean two different things:
One bone is broken in two different places, or more; or
One person has fractures in many different bones, all caused by the same injury (like being hit by a car).
On average, it usually takes 6-8 weeks for a fracture to heal.. However, healing times depend on many different things, like which bones were broken, how bad the breaks were, age (younger people usually heal faster), and nutrition.


== Diagnosis ==
Most fractures are diagnosed by using an X-ray. If the X-ray cannot see the fracture, other scans, like MRIs and CT scans, can show that a fracture exists.


== Treatment ==
The best way to "fix" a bone fracture is to make sure the ends of the broken bone are lined up and tight together. As the American Academy on Orthopedic Surgeons says:

"All forms of treatment of broken bones follow one basic rule: the broken pieces must be put back into position and prevented from moving out of place until they are healed.... Broken bone ends heal by "knitting" back together with new bone being formed around the edge of the broken parts."

To help decrease pain from the fracture, doctors can prescribe medications or suggest over-the-counter painkillers.
Scientists have come up with a few ways to "regenerate bone" (make the bone grow again). Their many ideas for future strategies include doing gene therapy and using 3-D printers.


== References ==


== Other websites ==
See illustrations with Simple English explanations of each of the types of fractures (from Brigham & Women's Hospital)
Simple English materials on broken bones for children and for teenagers (from KidsHealth.org)
"Patient-Friendly Bone Basics" about preventing osteoporosis and bone breaks (from the National Osteoporosis Foundation)Breast cancer is cancer in the breast.
In the world, breast cancer is the fifth most common cause of cancer death. The first four are lung cancer, stomach cancer, liver cancer, and colon cancer. In 2005, breast cancer caused 502,000 deaths (7% of cancer deaths; almost 1% of all deaths) in the world. Among all women in the world, breast cancer is the most common cancer.
In the United States, breast cancer is the most common cancer in women, and the second most common cause of cancer death in women (after lung cancer). In 2007, breast cancer caused about 40,910 deaths (7% of cancer deaths; almost 2% of all deaths) in the U.S. Women in the United States have a 1 in 8 chance of getting breast cancer in their lives. They have a 1 in 33 chance of death from breast cancer.
There are many more people getting breast cancer since the 1970s. This is because of how people in the Western world live. Because the breast is composed of identical tissues in males and females, breast cancer also occurs in males, though it is less common.
When a person gets breast cancer, they can try to cure it in three ways. Doctors can cut out the cancer (mastectomy or lumpectomy). They can give the person drugs (chemotherapy). They can also try to kill the cancer with energy (radiation). If one cure does not work, they may need to try another.


== References ==


== Other websites ==
Breast cancer at the Open Directory ProjectBreath sounds are the sounds made by air as it moves through the respiratory system. Breath sounds are also called lung sounds or respiratory sounds. Sometimes they can be heard by anyone; other times they can be heard only by listening to the lungs and airways with a stethoscope.
To describe and identify breath sounds, medical professionals usually use auscultation (they listen with a stethoscope). They listen while the patient is breathing in, and while they are breathing out. They listen to both lungs, at both the chest and the back, starting at the bottom and working their way up. They listen to whether the pitch of the breath sounds is low, medium or high. They also listen to whether the sounds are soft, medium, loud, or very loud).


== Abnormal Breath Sounds ==
There are many kinds of breath sounds that are not normal. These are called adventitious breath sounds. Each different kind of abnormal breath sound is a sign of a different problem. Some of the most common abnormal breath sounds are:


=== Wheezing ===
Wheezing is usually high-pitched. It sounds musical, like whistling. Usually, wheezing is heard first when a person is breathing out. If it gets worse, wheezing starts happening when the patient breathes in and out.
Wheezing is caused by the airways being too narrow. This can happen because of diseases like asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD).
If the airways are too narrow, the oxygen the body needs cannot get through. This can become a medical emergency.
There are a few different treatments that can be used for wheezing:
The patient can be given supplemental (extra) oxygen through a mask.
Sometimes, moist, hot air can help wheezing. Sitting in an area like a shower, or using a vaporizer (which creates moist, warm air) may be helpful for mild wheezing. EMTs or hospitals can also give humidified oxygen, which is mixed with warm water to make the oxygen into a warm steam.
There are medicines called bronchodilators that relax and open up the airways. This reverses the cause of wheezing and makes it easier to breathe. Albuterol is a very common bronchodilator and is carried on many ambulances. Bronchodilators can be given in inhalers or in a nebulizer (which mixes the medicine with warm water to make the medicine into steam).


=== Stridor ===
Stridor is a high-pitched sound that usually happens when a person breathes in. It may sound a lot like wheezing. Medical professionals can tell the difference by listening to the throat with a stethoscope. If the sound they hear is louder in the throat, it is stridor, not wheezing.
Stridor is usually caused by something blocking the larynx (voice box). This can happen because:
A person is choking and an object is blocking the larynx
A person has an infection, and swelling in the throat or airways blocks the larynx
The muscles in the airway or vocal cords spasm (suddenly get tighter); this is called laryngospasm
Like wheezing, stridor can signal a medical emergency if not enough oxygen is able to get through the airways.
Treatment for stridor depends on the cause:
Helping a person stop choking by using choke saving (like the Heimlich maneuver)
Treating the infection that is causing swelling in the larynx
Giving medicines to help the muscles in the airway or vocal cords relax
No matter what the cause is, giving extra oxygen may also help
Children are more likely to have stridor because of choking. They are more likely to choke because their airways are smaller. They are also more likely to get childhood infections like croup or epiglottitis that can cause stridor.


=== Rales (Fine Crackles) ===
Rales are also called fine crackles, because they often sound like a fine crackling noise. They are heard when a person breathes in, on both sides (in both lungs). Rales may also sound like bubbling, rattling, or small clicking sounds.
Rales are heard when a person has fluid in their lungs. This is called pulmonary edema. Pulmonary edema may happen for many reasons, like:
Congestive heart failure (CHF)
Pneumonia or other infections in the lungs
Injury to the lung
Blood clot in the lung (pulmonary embolism)
Breathing in smoke
Drowning
Rales signals pulmonary edema, no matter what is causing that pulmonary edema. When a medical professional listens to the lungs, rales usually start at the bottom of the lungs. As the pulmonary edema gets worse and fluid fills the lungs more, rales can be heard closer and closer to the top of the lungs.


=== Rhonchi (Coarse Crackles) ===
Rhonchi are also called coarse crackles, because they sound like coarse, rattling, crackling sounds. Rhonchi and rales can sound a lot alike. The main differences are:
Rales start at the bottom of the lungs and can be heard farther up as the patient gets sicker. They are heard on both sides (in both lungs) together.
Rhonchi are often heard just in certain spots in the lungs. They do not always start at the bottom of the lungs. They may be heard only on one side, or in different spots on both sides.
Rhonchi are usually caused by mucus in the bronchi, the tubes that lead to the lungs. For example, if a person has pneumonia, mucus can build up in their bronchi and the bronchi's airways, and cause rhonchi.


=== Unequal Breath Sounds ===
In a healthy person, breath sounds should always sound the same on both sides. This signals that both lungs are working well. If breath sounds cannot be heard in one lung, this can signal a serious problem. It means that air is not getting in and out of that lung.
One of the most common causes of unequal breath sounds is a collapsed lung (pneumothorax). A lung can collapse for many different reasons:
A very bad injury to the lung
Lung diseases like asthma, COPD, tuberculosis (TB), whooping cough, pneumonia, or cystic fibrosis
Sometimes air blisters called blebs form on the top of the lungs. If these air blisters break, air can leak out of the lungs and cause the lung to collapse.
Sometimes, a lung can collapse on its own. This is called a spontaneous pneumothorax.
A pneumothorax is often a medical emergency and needs to be treated in a hospital.


== References ==The bronchioles or bronchioli are a part of the lung. They are the first airway branches that no longer have cartilage. They are branches of the bronchi. The bronchioles end by entering the circular sacs called alveoli.Bronchitis is inflammation of the bronchi caused by irritation. It may also refer to acute bronchitis or chronic bronchitis. It can be caused by infection or other causes such as smoking, or being exposed to cigarettes.


== Other websites ==
NIH entry on Bronchitis
MedlinePlus entries on Acute bronchitis and Chronic bronchitis
Mayo Clinic factsheet on bronchitisBrucellosis is a disease that is caused by bacteria in the Brucella genus. It is also called Bang's disease, Crimean fever, Gibraltar fever, Malta fever, Maltese fever, Mediterranean fever, rock fever, and undulant fever. It is a very contagious disease (can be spread very easily from one person to another.)
Brucellosis is a zoonosis, a disease that is spread from animals to humans. Humans get the disease by drinking milk that is unsterilized, or by eating meat from sick animals. Sometimes, but not very often, the disease can be spread from human to human.
The disease was first called "Malta fever." British doctors in the military first discovered it in Malta during the Crimean War (1850s). Dr. David Bruce was the first person to discover the bacteria that caused brucellosis.


== References ==

yhgyr6yod8643Bubonic plague is the best-known form of the disease plague, which is caused by the bacterium Yersinia pestis. The name bubonic plague is specific for this form of the disease, which enters through the skin, and travels through the lymphatic system.
If the disease is left untreated, it kills about half its victims, in between three and seven days. The bubonic plague was the disease that caused the Black Death, which killed tens of millions of people in Europe, in the Middle Ages.
Symptoms of this disease include coughing, fever, and black spots on the skin.


== Different kinds of the same disease ==
There are different kinds of Bubonic plague. The most common form of the disease is spread by a certain kind of flea, that lives on rats. Then there is an incubation period which can last from a few hours to about seven days.


=== Septicemic plague ===
Sepsis happens when the bacterium enters the blood and make it form tiny clots.


=== Pneumonic plague ===
This happens when the bacterium can enter the lungs. About 95% of all people with this form will die. Incubation period is only one to two days.


=== The abortive form ===
This is the most harmless form. It will result in a little fever. After that, there are antibodies that protect against all forms for a long time.


== History ==
During the 1300s, this epidemic struck parts of Asia, North Africa, and Europe. Almost a third of the people in Europe died of it. Unlike catastrophes that pull communities together, this epidemic was so terrifying that it broke people's trust in one another. Giovanni Boccaccio, an Italian writer of the time, described it: "This scourge had implanted so great a terror in the hearts of men and women that brothers abandoned brothers, uncles their nephews, sisters their brothers, and in many cases wives deserted their husbands. But even worse,... fathers and mothers refused to nurse and assist their own children."


== Transmission ==

The plague was not just carried by rats as some people assume. The fleas also carried it. It came abroad from Kaffa by the Black Sea. From there the disease started to go new places in 1347. It went to England in 1349. There it killed half of the people in England. 70% of people who got plague died. Pigs are also to blame for the transmission, as the bacteria stayed in their blood system, and when eaten, people caught the plague. This is a reason why so few Jews or Muslims caught the disease.


== Modern history ==
In the 20th century, some countries did research on the bacteria that causes bubonic plague. They did research to use it for biological warfare.
Samples of this bacteria are carefully controlled. There is much paranoia (fear) about it. Dr. Thomas C. Butler, a US expert in this organism was charged in October 2003 by the FBI with various crimes. This happened after he said he lost samples of Yersinia pestis. This is the bacteria that causes bubonic plague. The FBI did not find the samples. They do not know what happened to them.


== References ==A bulbourethral gland (or Cowper's gland) is one of two small glands found in the reproductive system of human males. They are like Bartholin's glands.


== Anatomy ==
Bulbourethral glands are found near the urethra at the base of the penis, between the two layers of the fascia. The bulbourethral glands are about the size of a pea. They appear to slowly get smaller as a person gets older.
They are made of several lobules held together by a fibres.


== Uses ==
During sexual arousal each gland makes a clear liquid known as pre-ejaculate or "pre-cum". This fluid helps to lubricate the urethra for sperm to pass through. It also helps clean out any urine or dirt.


== Gallery ==


== References ==A burn is an injury to a person's skin or even flesh. Burns can grow to be very powerful, and in some cases, can even kill a person. There are six degrees of burns. Depending on the severity and amount of skin affected, a burn can be a medical emergency. For children, at least five percent of the skin needs to be affected. Adults can tolerate up to ten percent of affected skin.


== Characteristics ==

Burns are usually minor. They are usually Degree One to a minor Degree Two. Others are more powerful, such as Degree 3. People may get more powerful burns from high heat or radioactive items.


=== Degree One Burns ===
Degree One burns are minor and can be cured at home. They seldom leave scars. A person can get them from hot water, a minor sunburn, or by touching hot metal. It causes pain, but only the top layer of skin is burnt and no nerves are injured.


=== Degree Two Burns ===

Degree Two burns can be cured at home, but some people would prefer to take them to the hospital. This degree of burn goes into the second layer of skin.


=== Degree Three Burns ===
Degree Three burns are the most severe burns that most people can survive from. Although they may be severe, the chances of death are very low if treated at the hospital right away. It burns through all three layers of skin, leaving a scab.


=== Degree Four Burns ===
This degree of burn goes through the skin and destroys the nerves near it. There is no pain at the 4th degree burn area but there can be immense pain occurs around the burn. Very few have survived it. It must be treated at the hospital ASAP if it occurs and the person is still alive.


=== Degree Five Burns ===
This burn degree goes all the way through the skin, the nerves near it, and ends at the muscle.


=== Degree Six Burns ===
This degree goes and destroys the core of the body. It burns the skin, nerves, muscles, and scorches the bones. In other words, immediate death can and will happen.


== References ==The calcaneus is a bone of the foot and part of the heel. Its name came from the Latin word /kælˈkeɪniːəs/, calcaneus or calcaneum, meaning heel.


== References ==Candidiasis, often called yeast infection or thrush, is a type of infectious disease. It is a fungal infection (mycosis). The disease is caused by any of the Candida species of yeast. Candida albicans is the most common species.


== Causes ==
Candida yeasts are common in most people. The yeast is usually controlled in the body. When the yeast grows without control, an infection happens.
A weakened, unhealthy, or young immune system may allow candidiasis to develop. HIV/AIDS, cancer treatments, steroids, stress and not enough nutrients may cause candidiasis.
Antibiotic and steroid use are the most common reason for uncontrolled yeast. Antibiotic kills some bacteria, and changes the balance of microorganisms in the body. This may allow the yeast to multiply.


== Candidiasis in the throat and mouth ==


=== Throat ===
Esophageal candidiasis is an infection of the esophagus by Candida albicans. The disease happens in unhealthy people. Sometimes people will get the infection when they are treated with chemotherapy. People with AIDS can also get this infection more often.
One sign of esophageal candidiasis is painful swallowing. Weight loss can happen when a person has esophageal candidiasis for a long time.


=== Mouth ===
Oral candidiasis is a yeast infection of the mouth. It is located on the mucous membranes of the mouth. It is caused by Candida albicans, Candida glabrata or Candida tropicalis.


=== Signs ===
Candida may appear as thick white or cream-coloured areas on mucosal membranes. The infected mucosa of the mouth may look inflamed. In babies the condition is called thrush. For babies, it is usually painless and causes no pain. Adults may experience discomfort or burning sensation.


== Body parts ==
In healthy persons, candidiasis is usually a very small infection of the skin or mucous membranes. These areas include:
the mouth (oral candidiasis)
the vagina or vulva (vaginal candidiasis or thrush)
folds of skin in the diaper area (diaper rash)
the nipples while breastfeeding
the penis or foreskin
the armpit
the ear
the skin around or in the nostrils
the ears
Candidiasis is a very common cause of vaginal irritation, or vaginitis. It can also occur on the penis or scrotum. In unhealthy patients, the Candida infection can affect the esophagus. It could get everywhere in the body. This would cause a much more serious health condition, a state called candidemia. 


== References ==


== Other websites ==
National Institute of Allergies and Infections fact sheet on vaginitis/vaginal infections
Oral Thrush Mayo Clinic
DermAtlas candidiasis images
InteliHealth page on candidiasis Presented by InteliHealth reviewed by Harvard Medical School
Links to pictures of Yeast Infection (Hardin MD/Univ of Iowa)
Treating a vaginal yeast infectionCardiac arrest occurs when the heart suddenly stops beating. This can be caused by a heart attack in which the heart's demand for oxygen is not met and the heart muscle begins to die. The sudden failure of normal circulation of blood due to failure of the heart to contract results in the body not getting enough oxygenated blood. This causes cells to start to die from oxygen starvation. Cerebral hypoxia (lack of oxygen to the brain) makes a person lose consciousness and stop breathing, and this makes the heart stop completely. Unless the person is in hypothermia, brain damage usually occurs after three to five minutes. (In some cases, the person is put into hypothermia on purpose, to help the person recover better with less damage.)
Cardiac arrest is a medical emergency. If it is treated early enough, some of the damage done can be reversed in certain groups of patients. When cardiac arrest leads to a person's death, this is called sudden cardiac death (SCD). First aid treatment for cardiac arrest usually begins with cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) to keep oxygenated blood flowing until medical treatment is available.Cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a kind of disease that involves the heart or blood vessels. Cardiovascular disease includes coronary artery diseases (CAD) such as angina and myocardial infarction (commonly known as a heart attack). Other CVDs are stroke, hypertensive heart disease, rheumatic heart disease, cardiomyopathy, atrial fibrillation, congenital heart disease, endocarditis, aortic aneurysms, and peripheral artery disease.


== References ==Catalepsy is a nervous condition. The body is fixed, with rigid muscles and fixed posture. The body position does not respond to stimuli, and there is decreased sensitivity to pain.


== Causes ==
Catalepsy is a symptom of certain nervous disorders or conditions such as Parkinson's disease and epilepsy. It is also a characteristic symptom of cocaine withdrawal. It may be caused by schizophrenia treatment with anti-psychotics such as haloperidol. It may be caused by the anaesthetic ketamine. In some cases, catalepsy may be started by an extreme emotional shock – one well known example of this was the reaction of 1968 Olympic long jump medalist Bob Beamon on finding he had broken the previous world record by over 0.5 meters (2 feet). Protein kinase A has been suggested as a mediator of cataleptic behavior.


== References ==Catatonia means a person is awake, but does not move, talk, or react to anything but pain[source?]. The person can stay stiff and still for hours. A person with catatonia may look to be in a stupor (being mentally numb and in a daze). The cause is in the nervous system; the brain and nerves. This problem was first written about in 1874 in Die Katatonie oder das Spannungsirresein.


== Causes ==
Catatonia can sometimes happen with mental disorders. It can be a symptom of schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, and depression. Catatonia may also happen when a person abuses illegal drugs or overdoses by taking too much of a drug.
Catatonia can also be caused by many different medical disorders. Some causes are infections, such as encephalitis; autoimmune diseases; damage to the brain from strokes; and metabolic problems.
A person can also get catatonia from benzodiazepine withdrawal syndrome, which happens if the person quickly stops taking benzodiazepine medications. Catatonia can also be a bad reaction to illegal drugs.


== Treatment ==
Doctors can treat catatonia. They usually start with medicines such as benzodiazepines. If those medicines do not work; doctors may use shock therapy. Antipsychotic medicines can also be used, but with safety in mind. Sometimes they can make catatonia worse or have bad side effects. A group of anesthetic drugs called NMDA antagonists may be helpful when benzodiazepines don't work.


== References ==


== Other websites ==
Encyclopedia of Mental Disorders - Catatonic DisordersCerebral œdema (or cerebral edema) is a build-up of extra fluid in the brain. It causes swelling. It is caused by physical trauma or an injury to the brain. This includes inflammation of the brain caused by some infections. Also, mountain climbers at high altitude have been known to experience cerebral oedema primarily due to reduced air pressure acting on the cranium.


== References ==Cerebrovascular disease, stroke or cerebrovascular accident, is a vascular disease of the cerebral circulation. Arteries supplying oxygen to the brain are affected resulting in one of a number of cerebrovascular diseases. Most commonly this is a stroke or mini-stroke and sometimes can be a hemorrhagic stroke. Any of these can result in vascular dementia.


== Causes ==
Causes of cerebrovascular disease can be divided into: atherosclerosis, embolism, aneurysms, low flow states, and other rare causes. Major modifiable risk factors include:
hypertension
smoking
obesity
diabetes.


== Treatment ==
Treatment for cerebrovascular disease includes medication, lifestyle changes and surgery.
Examples of medications are:
Antiplatelets (Aspirin, Clopidogrel)
Blood thinners (Heparin, Warfarin )
Antihypertensives (ACE inhibitors, Beta blockers)
Anti-diabetic medications
Surgical procedures include:
Endovascular surgery and Vascular surgery (for future stroke prevention)


== Notable cases ==
Walter Cronkite, American news journalist. Died in 2010.
Roberts Blossom, American actor and poet. Died in 2011.
Shirley Hufstedler, American judge, first United States Secretary of Education. Died in 2016.


== References ==Chikungunya (pronounced "chicken-GUN-yay") is an infection caused by the chikungunya virus. It can cause joint pains that can last for weeks, months, or sometimes even years. About 1 in every 1000 people who gets chikungunya dies. People who are elderly or have other medical problems are most likely to die or get very sick from chikungunya.
Chikungunya is spread to humans by two species of mosquito: Aedes albopictus and Aedes aegypti. These mosquitoes carry the infection to humans after biting monkeys, birds, cattle, or rodents who have chikungunya. Since 2004, there have been outbreaks (where many people get chikungunya) in Asia, Europe, and The Americas.
There is no known treatment or cure for chikungunya.


== Signs and symptoms ==
It can take one to twelve days for a person to get sick after they get the chikungunya virus. (This period of time is called the virus's incubation period.) Usually, people get sick in three to seven days. Most people who get the virus (72% to 97%) get symptoms.
Chikungunya has an acute phase, which lasts a short time, and a chronic phase, which can last weeks, months, or years.


=== Acute phase ===
The acute phase usually begins with a sudden high fever that can last up to ten days. The fever is usually above 39 °C (102 °F), and can sometimes get as high as 40 °C (104 °F). About half of people with chikungunya get a rash, usually about two to five days after symptoms start. Some people also have gastrointestinal symptoms, like abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea. In rare cases, people may get conjunctivitis or other problems with their eyes.
The body starts to fight the virus after about a week by sending out immunoglobulin M (IgM), which attacks the virus. After this, most of the symptoms usually start to get better. However, people often keep having some symptoms for about another week, like headache, insomnia (trouble sleeping), and exhaustion. After these symptoms end, the acute phase of chikungunya is usually over.


=== Chronic phase ===
In chikungunya's chronic phase, almost everyone with the virus (87% - 98%) gets very bad joint pain or stiffness. This usually lasts for weeks or months. However, it can last for years. The joint pain can be so bad that a person cannot move the joints that hurt. The pain almost always happens in more than one joint. Usually, people have pain in the joints in their arms and legs, on both sides. These may include the joints in the wrists, ankles, hands, feet, shoulders, elbows, and knees. The virus can also cause pain in the muscles or ligaments.
Sometimes, it can be difficult to tell the difference between chikungunya and dengue fever. Both infections cause some of the same symptoms, like fever and very bad pain. However, chikungunya usually does not cause bleeding. If a person diagnosed with chikungunya has bleeding problems, they may:
Have dengue fever instead of chikungunya
Have both chikungunya and dengue fever (both are spread by mosquitoes, and are common in some of the same places)
Have both chikungunya and liver problems


== Prevention ==

The best way for people to protect themselves from chikungunya is to protect themselves from mosquitoes in places where the disease is common. For example, people may use bug spray and mosquito nets, and wear long sleeves and long pants when they are outside. In places where chikungunya is common, governments can also do things to control the number of mosquitoes. For example, they can spray pesticides.
There is no vaccine for chikungunya. Scientists are doing experiments to try to make a vaccine. However, scientists say that even if they created a vaccine, people would still have to control mosquitoes to prevent chikungunya.


== Treatment ==
There is no known treatment for chikungunya. No known anti-viral medicines (medicines which kill viruses) kill the chikungunya virus.
Medical professionals can only give "supportive care." This means they can only treat chikungunya's symptoms. For example, they may treat fever and joint pain with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) like naproxen; painkillers like paracetamol (acetaminophen); and fluids. Aspirin is not given because it can make bleeding more likely to happen.


=== Chronic joint pain ===
Scientists have not found any medication that helps everyone with chikungunya who has bad joint pain. There is some evidence that certain medicines may help people who have bad joint pain for more than two weeks. These medicines include:
Ribavirin, an anti-viral medicine
Chloroquine, a medicine usually given to prevent malaria
Methotrexate, a medicine used for rheumatoid arthritis, which also causes very bad joint pain
These medicines do not help the symptoms of chikungunya during the acute phase.


== Prognosis ==
About 1 in 1000 people who get chikungunya die from the disease. People older than 65, newborn babies, and people with other medical problems are most likely to have the most dangerous problems. Chikungunya is especially dangerous for newborns because they can get the virus from their mothers during childbirth, and because newborns' immune systems have to grow before they work as well as adults'. This makes it much more difficult for newborns to fight off the virus.
Elderly people, and people who already have arthritis, are more likely to have chronic joint pain.


== Epidemiology ==

In the past, chikungunya existed mostly in developing countries. However, more recently, there have been epidemics (where a very large number of people get the virus) in the Indian Ocean, the Pacific Islands, and the Americas.
When chikungunya was first discovered in 1952, it was uncommon and happened only in West Africa. People usually got the disease during rainy seasons, because mosquitoes are more common during these times. Beginning in the 1960s, there were sometimes outbreaks in Asia and Africa. However, until 2005, chikungunya had been uncommon throughout the world.
Since 2005, chikungunya has become much more common. It has caused large outbreaks in Africa, Asia, and the Americas. For example, in India, chikungunya re-appeared after 32 years where no Indian person had gotten the virus. Outbreaks have also happened in Europe, the Caribbean, and South America, where chikungunya had never spread before. A few people have also gotten chikungunya in the United States and Australia, where the virus had never lived before.
In 2005, there was a very large outbreak on Réunion, an island in the Indian Ocean. Out of about 770,000 people who lived on the island, about 266,000 (over 1 in every 3 people) got chikungunya. In 2006, about 1.25 million people in India got the virus.
Chikungunya was recently spread to the Americas. From 2013-2014 in the Americas, 1,118,763 people have been thought to have the virus. Of these cases, 24,682 were proven to be chikungunya.
Some scientists think that chikungunya has become much more common because of a change in the virus's genetic code. This change may have made it easier for the virus to make copies of itself in mosquito cells. It may have also allowed the virus to be spread more easily by the Asian tiger mosquito (Aedes albopictus). This is important because the Asian tiger mosquito lives in many more places than Aedes aegypti, the other species of mosquito that spreads chikungunya to humans. Aedes aegypti lives only in tropical places. However, the Asian tiger mosquito spreads easily, and lives in Europe, the Americas, the Caribbean, Africa, and the Middle East.


== History ==
Chikungunya was first described by Marion Robinson and W.H.R. Lumsden in 1955, after an outbreak in 1952 along the border between Mozambique and Tanganyika (now part of Tanzania). A group called the Makonde lived in this area. The word "chikungunya" probably comes from the Makonde language. It means "that which bends up" or "to walk bent over." This describes how people with very bad joint pain from the virus would bend into unusual positions.
The first recorded outbreak of chikungunya may have been in 1779. Scientific evidence agrees that the virus evolved around the year 1700.
Chikungunya was once researched as a possible biological weapon.


== References ==The clitoral glans (glans clitoridis) is a part of the clitoris found on the outside of the vagina.


== Anatomy ==
The clitoral glans is covered by the clitoral hood, which is attached to the labia minora. The whole structure is attached to the frenulum clitoridis and clitoral body (which is internal).


== Physiology ==
The glans (head) of the clitoris is about the size and shape of a pea. It is highly sensitive because it has lots of nerves around and on it for arousal. During arousal, the glans fills with blood.


== Other websites ==
SUNY Labs 41:02-0203 - "The Female Perineum: The Vulva"The cochlea is the auditory portion of the inner ear. It is a spiral-shaped cavity in the bony labyrinth, making 2.5 turns around its axis. A core component of the cochlea is the Organ of Corti, the sensory organ of hearing, which is distributed along the partition separating fluid chambers in the coiled tapered tube of the cochlea.
The name is from the Greek κοχλίας kokhlias ("snail, screw"), from κόχλος kokhlos ("spiral shell"). This is in reference to its coiled shape: the cochlea is coiled in most mammals, monotremes being the exceptions.


== References ==Colorectal cancer, also known as colon cancer, rectal cancer, or bowel cancer, is a cancer in the colon or rectum (parts of the large intestine), or in the appendix. Genetic analysis shows that essentially colon and rectal tumours are genetically the same cancer. Symptoms of colorectal cancer typically include rectal bleeding and anemia which are sometimes associated with weight loss and changes in bowel habits.
It is estimated that worldwide, 1.23 million new cases of colorectal cancer are clinically diagnosed, and that it kills 608,000 people per year.


== References ==The common cold (also known as nasopharyngitis, rhinopharyngitis, acute coryza, or a cold) is an easily spread infectious disease of the upper respiratory system. It damages mostly the nose and throat. The symptoms include cough, painful throat, runny nose (rhinorrhea), and fever. These symptoms usually last seven to ten days, but sometimes up to three weeks. Over two hundred different viruses can cause the common cold, but rhinoviruses are the most common cause.
Acute infections of the nose, sinuses, throat or larynx (upper respiratory tract infections, URI or URTI) are sorted by the areas of the body that are mostly hurt. The common cold mostly hurts the nose, pharyngitis the throat, and sinusitis the sinuses. The symptoms come from the immune system's response to the infection, not from direct destruction by the viruses themselves. Hand washing is the main way to keep the common cold from happening. Wearing face masks might also help.
There is no cure for the common cold, but the symptoms can be treated. It is the most frequent infectious disease in humans. The average person gets two to three colds every year. The average child gets between six and twelve colds every year. These colds have been with humans for thousands of years.


== Signs and symptoms ==
The most common symptoms of a cold are a cough, runny nose, a stuffy nose, and a sore throat. Other issues are sore muscles, feeling tired, headache, and not wanting to eat. Around 40% of people with colds have a sore throat, while around 50% have a cough. Muscle ache happens in about half of the cases. A fever is an uncommon symptom in adults, but it is common in infants and young children. The cough caused by a cold is usually mild compared to a cough caused by influenza (the flu). A cough and a fever indicate a higher likelihood of the flu in adults. A number of the viruses that cause the common cold may also result in no symptoms. The color of the mucus that is coughed up from the lower airways (sputum) may vary in color from clear to yellow to green. This color does not indicate if an infection is caused by viruses or bacteria.


=== Progression ===
A cold usually begins with feeling tired, a feeling of being chilled, sneezing, and a headache. Additional symptoms such as runny nose and cough follow within two or more days. Symptoms typically reach their worst two to three days after the infection begins. Symptoms usually end after seven to ten days, but can last up to three weeks. The cough lasts for more than ten days in 35% to 40% of cases involving children. It lasts for more than 25 days in 10% of cases involving children.


== Cause ==


=== Viruses ===

The common cold is an easily spread infection of the upper respiratory tract. The rhinovirus is the most common cause of the common cold. It accounts for 30% to 80% of all cases. A rhinovirus is an RNA-containing virus of the family Picornaviridae. There are 99 known types of viruses in this family of viruses.
Other viruses can also cause the common cold. The Coronavirus causes 10% to 15% of cases. The flu causes 5% to 15% of cases. Other cases may be caused by human parainfluenza viruses, human respiratory syncytial virus, adenoviruses, Enteroviruses, and metapneumovirus. Frequently, more than one virus is present and causing the infection. In total, over two hundred different viruses[k2] are associated with colds.


=== Transmission ===
The common cold virus is usually spread in one of two main ways. By breathing or swallowing droplets in the air containing the virus; or by contacting infected nasal mucus or contaminated objects. The most common method of transmitting the cold virus has not been determined. The viruses may survive for a long time in the environment. Viruses may then be transmitted from the hands to the eyes or nose where infection occurs. People sitting close together appear at greater risk of becoming infected. Transmission is common in day cares and at schools, due to the closeness of many children with little immunity and frequently poor hygiene. These infections are then brought home to other members of the family. There is no evidence that the air on commercial flights transmits cold viruses. Rhinoviruses are most infectious in the first three days of cold symptoms. They are much less infectious afterwards.


=== Weather ===
The traditional theory was that the disease spread to someone staying too long in cold weather, rain, or winter conditions. This is how the disease got its name. The role of body cooling as a risk factor for the common cold is controversial. Some common cold viruses are seasonal, found more often in cold or wet weather. This is believed to mostly be due to more time spent indoors, close to each other; specifically children returning to school. Still, changes in the respiratory system may result in easier infections. Dry air may increase transmission rates by allowing small easily spread droplets to spread farther and stay in the air longer.


=== Other ===
Herd immunity, immunity that occurs when an entire group of people become immune to a particular infection, occurs from previous exposure to cold viruses. Thus younger populations have greater rates of respiratory infections and older populations have lower rates of respiratory infections. Poor immune function is also a risk factor for disease. Lack of sleep and poor nutrition have also been associated with a greater risk of developing infection following rhinovirus exposure. This is believed to be due to their effects on immune function.


== Pathophysiology ==

The symptoms of the common cold are believed to be mostly related to the immune response to the virus. The mechanism of this immune response is virus-specific. For example, the rhinovirus is typically acquired by direct contact. It binds to human ICAM-1 receptors through unknown methods to trigger the release of inflammatory mediators. These inflammatory mediators then produce the symptoms. It does not generally cause damage to the nasal epithelium.
In contrast, the respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is contacted by both direct contact and airborne droplets. It then replicates in the nose and throat before frequently spreading to the lower respiratory tract. RSV does cause epithelium damage.
Human parainfluenza virus typically results in inflammation of the nose, throat, and airways. In young children, when it affects the trachea it may produce croup, a hoarse cough and difficulty breathing. This is due to the small size of the airway in children.


== Diagnosis ==
The distinction between different upper respiratory tract infections (URTIs) is loosely based on the location of the symptoms. The common cold primarily affects the nose, pharyngitis primarily affects the throat, and bronchitis primarily affects the lungs. The common cold is frequently defined as inflammation of the nose and may include varying amounts of throat inflammation. Self-diagnosis is common. Isolation of the actual viral agent involved is rarely performed. It is generally not possible to identify the specific virus through symptoms.


== Prevention ==
The only effective way to prevent the common cold is by physically preventing the spread of the viruses. This primarily includes hand washing and wearing face masks. In the health care environment, gowns and disposable gloves are also worn. Isolating infected individuals is not possible because the disease is so widespread and symptoms are not specific. Vaccination has proved difficult because there are so many viruses involved and the viruses undergo rapid change. Developing a broadly effective vaccine is very unlikely.
Regular hand washing reduces the spread of cold viruses. It is most effective and is especially recommended for use in children, due to a lack of evidence supporting the effectiveness of over-the-counter cold medicines for children, and due to the risk for harm from those medicines. In 2009, Canada restricted the use of over-the-counter cough and cold medication in children six years old and younger due to concerns regarding risks and unproven benefits. The misuse of dextromethorphan (an over-the-counter cough medicine) has led to its ban in a number of countries.
In adults, the symptoms of a runny nose can be reduced by first-generation antihistamines. However, first-generation antihistamines are associated with adverse side effects such as drowsiness. Other decongestants such as pseudoephedrine are also effective in adults. Ipratropium nasal spray may reduce the symptoms of a runny nose, but there is little effect on stuffiness. Second-generation antihistamines do not appear to be effective.
Due to the lack of studies, it is not known whether drinking more fluids improves symptoms or shortens respiratory illness. A similar lack of data exists for the use of heated humidified air. One study found chest vapor rub to be effective in providing some symptomatic relief of night-time cough, congestion, and sleep difficulty.


=== Antibiotics and antivirals ===
Antibiotics have no effect against viral infections and thus have no effect against the common cold. Antibiotics are often prescribed even though antibiotic side effects cause overall harm. Antibiotics are commonly prescribed because people expect doctors to prescribe them, and doctors want to help people. Prescribing antibiotics also happens because it is difficult to exclude causes of infection that may be managed by antibiotics. There are no effective antiviral drugs for the common cold, even though some preliminary research has shown benefit.


=== Alternative treatments ===
While there are many alternative treatments used for the common cold, there is not enough scientific evidence to support the use of most treatments. As of 2010, there is not enough evidence to recommend for or against either honey or nasal irrigation. Zinc supplements may reduce the severity and duration of symptoms when taken within 24 hours of their onset. The effect of vitamin C on the common cold, while extensively researched, is disappointing. Evidence about the usefulness of echinacea is inconsistent. Different types of echinacea supplements may vary in their effectiveness.


== Outcome ==
The common cold is generally mild and goes away on its own with most symptoms improving in one week. Severe complications, if they occur, are usually in the very old, the very young, or those who are immunosuppressed (have a weakened immune system). Secondary bacterial infections may occur resulting in sinusitis, pharyngitis, or an ear infection. It is estimated that sinusitis occurs in 8% of cases. Ear infections occur in 30% of cases.


== Likelihood ==
The common cold is the most common human disease and people are affected all around the world. Adults typically have two to five infections per year. Children may have six to ten colds per year (and up to twelve colds per year for school children). Rates of symptomatic infections increase in the elderly due to a weakening immune system.


== History ==
While the cause of the common cold has been known since only the 1950s, the disease has been with humanity since ancient times. Its symptoms and treatment are described in the Egyptian Ebers papyrus, the oldest existing medical text, written before the 16th century BC. The name "common cold" came into use in the 16th century, due to the similarity between its symptoms and those of exposure to cold weather.
In the United Kingdom, the Common Cold Unit (CCU) was set up by the Medical Research Council in 1946, and it was here that the rhinovirus was discovered in 1956. In the 1970s, the CCU demonstrated that treatment with interferon during the incubation phase of rhinovirus infection provided some protection against the disease. No practical treatment could be developed. The unit was closed in 1989, two years after it completed research of zinc gluconate lozenges in the prevention and treatment of rhinovirus colds. Zinc was the only successful treatment developed in the history of the CCU.


== Economic impact ==
The economic impact of the common cold is poorly understood in much of the world. In the United States, the common cold leads to 75 million to 100 million physician visits annually, costing at least $7.7 billion per year (by conservative cost estimates). Americans spend $2.9 billion on over-the-counter (OTC) drugs. Americans spend an additional $400 million on prescription medicines for symptomatic relief. More than one-third of people who saw a doctor received an antibiotic prescription. The use of antibiotic prescriptions has implications for antibiotic resistance. An estimated 22 million to 189 million school days are missed each year due to a cold. As a result, parents missed 126 million workdays to stay home to care for their children. When added to the 150 million workdays missed by employees suffering from a cold, the total economic impact of cold-related work loss exceeds $20 billion per year. This accounts for 40% of time lost from work in the United States.


== Research ==
A number of antivirals have been tested for effectiveness in the common cold. As of 2009, none have been both found effective and licensed for use. There are ongoing trials of the antiviral drug pleconaril. It shows promise against picornaviruses. There are also ongoing trials of BTA-798. The oral form of pleconaril had safety issues and an aerosol form is being studied.
Researchers from the University of Maryland, College Park and the University of Wisconsin–Madison have mapped the genome for all known virus strains that cause the common cold.


== References ==

Ronald Eccles, Olaf Weber (eds) (2009). Common cold (Online-Ausg. ed.). Basel: Birkhäuser. ISBN 978-3764398941. http://books.google.ca/books?id=rRIdiGE42IEC.


== Related Videos ==
FindDocTV - Fly while Having a ColdThe corpus callosum is part of the brain in humans and other eutherian mammals. It is the largest connective pathway in the brain. Its over 200 million nerve fibers connect the left and right hemispheres of the brain.
The corpus callosum relates to the lateralization of brain function. Because the two side of the brian communicate so intensively, they can afford to specialise in doing somewhat different things.


== Only in higher mammals ==
The corpus callosum is found only in placental mammals (the eutherians). It is absent in monotremes and marsupials, and other vertebrates such as birds, reptiles, amphibians and fish.
Other groups do have brain structures that allow for communication between the two hemispheres. The anterior commissure serves as the main cross-hemisphere communication in marsupials.
The fibrous bundle of the corpus callosum increases to such an extent in humans that it wedges apart the hippocampal structures.


== References ==
== AnatomyEdit ==
The corpus cavernosum clitoridis is one of two sponge-like tissue found in the body of the clitoris. It is similar to the corpus cavernosum penis in the male.
The female has no corpus spongiosum, but instead two vestibular bulbs beneath the skin at the entrance to the vagina), which expand at the same time as the glans clitoris.
Each corpus is connected to the blood vessels of the pubic bone and hip bone by the clitoris.


== PhysiologyEdit ==
Sometimes, release of nitric oxide relaxes muscles around the vagina, called sexual arousal. More blood flows in through the corpus cavernosum and the clitoris is filled with blood. This leads to better sensitivity.


== ReferencesEdit ==The corpus cavernosum penis (or corpus cavernosum urethrae) is one of two sponge-like sections of tissue in the male penis. They contain most of the blood during an erection. The term literally means "cave-like body"


== Process ==
The corpus cavernosum are placed along the length of the penis. They are found along the penis shaft, from the pubic bones to the head of the penis. The spongy tissue fills with blood. The blood comes from arteries down the length of the penis. The blood fills the corpora cavernosa. This causes it to swell. When swollen, it holds 90% of the blood involved in an erection. This increases both the length and circumference of the penis.
Blood can leave only through a system of veins around the outside wall of the corpus cavernosum. The expanding tissue constricts these veins. This preventing blood from leaving. The penis becomes rigid as a result.Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (pronounced KROITS-felt YAH-kohb) or CJD is a neurological disease. It is degenerative (it gets worse over time); it cannot be cured; and it always causes death. CJD is sometimes called a human form of "mad cow disease" (bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or BSE). BSE is actually a cause of one rare type of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease; the two are not the same disease.
CJD is caused by an infectious agent called a prion. Prions are proteins that are folded wrong. Prions make copies of themselves by changing correctly folded proteins into misfolded shapes. CJD causes the brain tissue to become unhealthy very quickly. As the disease destroys the brain, the brain develops holes. The brain's texture changes and becomes like a kitchen sponge.


== Types and causes of CJD ==
Types of CJD include:
variant (vCJD):
This type of CJD may be caused by eating food that has prions in it, like meat from cows that have BSE ("mad cow disease"). However, this is a very uncommon cause of CJD.
sporadic (sCJD):
This is the most common type of CJD. 85% of cases of CJD are sporadic CJD. Nobody knows what causes sCJD; it seems to happen randomly.
familial (fCJD):
Most of the other 15% of cases of CJD are familial CJD. This is form of CJD runs in families.
iatrogenic:
This form of CJD is usually caused by a medical procedure where a person gets blood or tissue from someone with CJD. For example, if a person can get iatrogenic CJD if they get a blood transfusion or a cornea transplant from someone who has CJD.


== Signs and symptoms ==
The first symptom of CJD is dementia, which gets worse very quickly. The dementia causes memory loss, personality changes, and hallucinations.
Other common mental symptoms include:
Anxiety
Depression
Paranoia
Obsessive-compulsive symptoms
Psychosis
Physical symptoms of CJD often include:
Trouble speaking
Jerky movements (myoclonus)
Trouble with balance (ataxia)
Trouble walking
Shaking or being stiff
Vision problems
Trouble swallowing, which can make eating difficult or impossible
Trouble coughing, which can cause pneumonia
Movements that the patient cannot control (dyskinesia)
Most people with CJD die within six months after their first symptoms appeared. Often, they die of pneumonia caused by trouble coughing. About 15% of patients survive for two or more years. Some patients have lived 4–5 years with mostly mental symptoms, until the disease gets worse and causes more physical symptoms. Once this happens, people usually die within a year.
The symptoms of CJD are caused by the death of more and more of the brain's nerve cells. When scientists look at brain tissue from a CJD patient under a microscope, they can see many tiny holes where whole areas of nerve cells have died.


== Diagnosis ==
Doctors may suspect CJD when a person has certain symptoms. For example, dementia usually gets worse slowly. Dementia that gets worse very quickly is unusual. Along with symptoms like jerky movements, these symptoms may point to possible CJD.

Tests can then be done to show whether the person has CJD. These tests include:
Electroencephalography (EEG): This test that shows the electrical activity in the brain. A doctor will often be able to see changes on the EEG that are common in people with CJD. The type of changes that show on the EEG will depend on the type of CJD the patient has, and how far along their disease is.
Lumbar puncture (spinal tap): This test makes it possible to study cerebrospinal fluid (the fluid that surrounds the brain and spinal cord), looking for a specific protein ("14-3-3 protein")
MRI of the brain: A test that uses a very strong magnet to take pictures of the brain
Biopsy: To do a biopsy, a surgeon uses a needle to take a small piece of tissue from the body, so doctors can look at it under a microscope. vCJD can be diagnosed with a biopsy of the tonsils. For all of the other types of CJD, a biopsy of the brain is the only way to tell for sure if a person has CJD. However, since a biopsy of the brain can cause brain damage, a brain biopsy is usually not done if other tests have already shown that a person probably has CJD.


== Treatment ==
As of 2016, there is no treatment that cures CJD or even slows down its effects. Many experiments are being done to try to find treatments.
Today, the only treatments for CJD are medicines that treat the disease's symptoms and help patients be more comfortable. For example, patients who have seizures may be given anticonvulsant medications. Benzodiazepines can make muscle jerks happen less often.
Patients may also choose to have medical procedures to help with bad symptoms. For example, CJD may cause so much trouble swallowing that a person cannot eat. Some people with CJD choose to have a feeding tube put in when they can no longer eat. This is a tube that goes into the stomach, so that special liquid can be given right into the stomach to give the person nutrition.


== Related pages ==
Prion
Prion disease
Terminal illness


== References ==Croup (or laryngotracheobronchitis) is caused by a virus and leads to swelling inside the throat. This swelling causes problems with normal breathing. People with croup can have a "barking"cough, stridor (a high-pitched wheezing sound), and hoarseness. Croup symptoms often get worse at night. Taking steroids by mouth can treat the condition. Sometimes epinephrine is used in more severe cases. Hospitalization is rarely required.
Doctors decide if a person has croup after they have eliminated other possibilities (for example, an airway foreign body). Blood tests, X-rays, and cultures are not needed. Croup is common. About 15% of children between 6 months and 5–6 years old get croup. Teenagers and adults rarely get croup.


== Signs and symptoms ==
Croup symptoms include a "barking" cough, stridor ( a high pitched sound typically when breathing in), hoarseness, and difficult breathing that are worse at night. The "barking" cough can sound like a seal or sea lion. Crying can make the wheezing worse; wheezing can mean that the airways are narrowed. As croup gets worse, the wheezing can decrease.
Other symptoms are fever, symptoms typical of the common cold), and the skin between the ribs pulling in when the child breathes. Drooling or a sick appearance can mean a different illness. The virus infection leads to swelling in the throat and air passages that can make breathing difficult.


== Causes ==
Most croup is caused by a virus infection. Some people call severe laryngotracheitis croup. This disease is caused by a milder virus. Croup also can be laryngeal diphtheria, bacterial tracheitis, laryngotracheobronchitis, and laryngotracheobronchopneumonitis. These diseases are caused by bacteria and are more severe.


=== Virus ===
In 75% of cases, the parainfluenza virus, mainly types 1 and 2, causes croup. Other viruses that can cause croup include influenza A and B, measles, adenovirus and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). Spasmodic croup (croup with barking) does not have the usual signs of infection, such as fever, sore throat, and increased white blood cell count). Treating spasmodic croup is the same as treating regular croup.


=== Bacterial ===
Bacterial croup includes laryngeal diphtheria, bacterial tracheitis, laryngotracheobronchitis, and laryngotracheobronchopneumonitis. Corynebacterium diphtheriae causes laryngeal diphtheria; bacterial tracheitis, laryngotracheobronchitis, and laryngotracheobronchopneumonitis come from a virus infection, followed by a bacteria infection. The most common bacteria that cause croup areStaphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Hemophilus influenzae, and Moraxella catarrhalis.


== Diagnosis ==
Croup is diagnosed based on signs and symptoms. The first step is to make sure it is not another condition that can block the upper airway, especially epiglottitis (an inflammation of the tissue that covers the trachea or windpipe) , something in the airway, subglottic stenosis (narrowing of the airway below the vocal cords), angioedema (swelling underneath the skin), retropharyngeal abscess (pus in the back of the throat), and bacterial tracheitis (bacterial infection in the trachea).
An X-ray of the neck is not routine, but if it is done, it can show a narrowing of the trachea, called the steeple sign, because the narrow shape looks like a church steeple. The steeple sign does not appear in half of cases.
Blood tests and viral cultures (tests for the virus) can cause irritate the airway. Cultures of the virus, obtained by nasopharyngeal aspiration (using a tube to suck mucus out of the nose), are used to confirm the exact cause. These cultures are restricted to people doing research. If a person does not improve with standard treatment, further tests can be done to check for bacteria.
Severity
The most common system for describing the severity of croup is the Westley score. This test is used for research, but does not help the person with croup. Points are given for five factors: level of consciousness, cyanosis (blue skin coloring), stridor (wheezing), air entry, and retractions (skin on the chest pulling in). The table to the right lists the points given for each factor; the final score ranges from 0 to 17.
A total score of ≤ 2 points indicates mild croup. The person can have barking cough and hoarseness, but there is no stridor (wheezing) when the person is resting.
A total score of 3–5 is moderate croup — the person has wheezing, with few other signs.
A total score of 6–11 is severe croup. The patient has obvious wheezing and the skin on the chest wall indraws or pulls in.
A total score of ≥ 12 means respiratory failure is possible. The barking cough and wheezing does not always happen at this stage.
85% of children going to the emergency department have mild disease. Severe croup is rare–less than 1% of cases.


== Prevention ==
Immunization (vaccines) for influenza and diphtheria can prevent croup.


== Treatment ==
It is important to keep children with croup as calm as possible. Children often are given steroids, but epinephrine is used in severe cases. If the amount of blood oxygen is under 92%, the child needs oxygen. People with severe croup can be hospitalized for observation. If oxygen is needed, "blow-by" administration (holding an oxygen source near the face of the child) is better than an oxygen mask, because it is less likely to upset a child than an oxygen mask is. With treatment, less than 0.2% of people need endotracheal intubation(a tube placed into the airway).


=== Steroids ===
Corticosteroids, such as dexamethasone and budesonide, can be used to treat croup. People begin to improve a lot within six hours after taking steroids. Steroids work when given by mouth, injection, or inhalation (breathing them in), but taking them by mouth is best. Most of the time, a single dose is enough. Dexamethasone at doses of 0.15, 0.3 and 0.6 mg/kg appear to be all equally good.


=== Epinephrine ===
Moderate to severe croup can be helped with nebulized epinephrine(an inhaled solution that widens the airway). While epinephrine reduces croup severity within 10–30 minutes, the benefits last for only about 2 hours. If symptoms improve for 2–4 hours after treatment and no other complications happen, the child typically can leave the hospital.


=== Other ===
There is not enough evidence that other treatments for croup are helpful. Clinical studies do not show that breathing hot steam or humidified air is helpful and currently it rarely is used. Medical professionals do not want people to use cough medicines, which containdextromethorphan and/or guiafenesin. Clinical studies also do not support inhaling heliox (a mixture of helium and oxygen) to make it easier to breath. Since most cases of croup is are diseases, antibiotics are not used unless bacteria are also suspected. The antibiotics vancomycin and cefotaxime are recommended for bacterial infections. In severe cases associated with influenza A or B, theanti neuraminidase inhibitors can be given.


== Likely outcome ==
Most of the time, croup caused by a virus is a short-term disease. Croup rarely causes death from respiratory failure and/or cardiac arrest. Symptoms improve within two days, but can last for up to seven days. Other uncommon complications include bacterial tracheitis (infection of the trachea), pneumonia (lung infection), and pulmonary edema (fluid in the lungs).


== Epidemiology ==
About 15% of children between the ages of 6 months and 5–6 years will get croup. Croup accounts for about 5% of hospital admissions for this age group. In rare cases, children as young as 3 months and as old as 15 years have croup. Males are affected 50% more frequently than are females; croup is more common in autumn (fall).


== History ==
The word croup comes from the Early Modern English verb croup, meaning "to cry hoarsely"; the name was first used for the disease in Scotland. Diphtheritic croup has been known since the time of Homer's Ancient Greece. In 1826, Bretonneau distinguished croup from a virus and croup due to diphtheria. The French called croup from a virus "faux-croup," using "croup" for a disease caused by the diphtheria bacteria. Croup due to diphtheria has become nearly unknown since most people are immunized.


== References ==Cyanosis is a medical problem. When a person has cyanosis, their skin and mucous membranes turn blue or purple. Cyanosis is a sign that the cyanotic (blue) parts of the body are not getting enough blood and oxygen. This can happen because there is not enough oxygen in the blood. It can also happen when small blood vessels in the body get smaller because of a medical problem (this is called vasoconstriction).
Usually cyanosis is first seen in the extremities (the parts of the body that are farthest away from the heart). Usually the first parts of the body to become cyanotic are the fingertips (especially under the fingernails), the toes, the lips, the tip of the nose, and the earlobes. As the body goes longer without oxygen, more of the body becomes cyanotic.


== References ==Cyclic vomiting syndrome (US English) or cyclical vomiting syndrome (UK English), abbreviated CVS, is a medical condition whose main symptoms are nausea and repeated vomiting. CVS happens more often in children but it can occur at any age.
CVS is one of the childhood periodic syndromes. This is a group of migraines syndromes that happen to children. Children who have one of these childhood periodic syndromes like cyclic vomiting, will when they get older, usually get one of the other types of migraine that affect adults


== References ==Delirium tremens (often called DTs or the DTs) is a medical emergency. It is the worst form of alcohol withdrawal, which can happen when a person who drinks a lot of alcohol suddenly stops drinking. "Delirium" means very bad confusion that comes on quickly; "tremens" means "shaking."
Scientists think the DTs happen because the autonomic nervous system gets too excited. It works too hard and will not shut off.
DTs were first described in 1813.


== Who gets DTs? ==
Most people who stop drinking alcohol do not get the DTs. But some people are more likely to get the DTs if they suddenly stop drinking. DTs are more likely in people who:
Have had seizures when they tried to stop drinking alcohol before
Have drunk a lot of alcohol every day for several months
Have drunk alcohol for more than 10 years
Are sick or have other medical problems when they suddenly stop drinking
About 5% of people who have alcohol withdrawal symptoms get the DTs. About 5-10% of chronic (long-term) alcoholics get the DTs at some point in their life.


== Symptoms ==
DTs cause symptoms that can be very bad and very dangerous. Even though not many people get DTs when they stop drinking, many people that do get DTs die from them. Others get permanent brain damage or other problems.
Symptoms usually start within 2 to 3 days after the person had their last drink. But in some people, DTs can happen up to a week or 10 days after their last drink.


=== Life-threatening symptoms ===
Most people who die from DTs die from one or more of these symptoms:
Very bad seizures, especially status epilepticus
Hyperthermia (a very high body temperature; if the body's temperature gets high enough, the brain will die)
Severe hypertension (very high blood pressure; if the blood pressure gets high enough, it can cause a stroke)
Severe tachycardia (very high heart rate; if the heart beats too fast, it cannot get blood and oxygen to the rest of the body. Without enough blood and oxygen, no part of the body can survive. Eventually breathing can stop. The brain can die or be damaged. The heart can stop beating normally or stop beating completely.)


=== Other changes to the body ===
Other body symptoms caused by DTs include:
Very bad sweating
Shaking or tremors (which may be uncontrollable)
Insomnia (being unable to sleep)
Feeling very restless


=== Changes to thinking and feelings ===
DTs can cause changes to thinking and feelings that can be very scary for the patient:
Very bad anxiety, panic attacks, paranoia, or agitation (feeling very upset and unable to relax)
The person may be so anxious or upset that they are certain they are going to die

Being very confused (for example, the person might not recognize their family members)
Being disoriented (for example, the person may not know who he is, where he is, or what is happening)
Being unable to think normally or pay attention to anything
Being unable to talk normally


=== Changes to the senses ===
DTs can cause major changes to the senses, especially what a person sees, hears, and feels. For example:
Visual hallucinations: seeing things that are not really there. These things seem very real to the person with DTs. For example, sometimes people with DTs see very scary visions of insects, snakes, or rats.
These visions often go along with the feeling that things like bugs are crawling on the person with DTs.
Auditory hallucinations: hearing things that are not really there.


== Treatment ==
DTs always need to be treated in a hospital. If a person starts having symptoms of DTs at home, 9-1-1 (or their local emergency number) should be called for an ambulance right away.
Several types of medicines can be used to treat DTs:
Benzodiazepines are the most common type of medicine used for DTs. In the United Kingdom, chlordiazepoxide (Librium) and diazepam (Valium) are most often used. In the United States, lorazepam (Ativan) and oxazepam are often used too. These medicines will keep the person asleep or relaxed, make them more comfortable, and help prevent seizures.
Sometimes anticonvulsant (anti-seizure) medicines are also used to prevent or treat seizures.
Antipsychotic medicines, like haloperidol (Haldol), may be used to help make hallucinations go away.
People with DTs are also often given thiamine (vitamin B1), an important vitamin, because alcoholics often do not have enough thiamine. If thiamine levels are low enough, this can cause brain damage.


== References ==Dengue fever (pronounced "DEN-gay") is an infectious disease caused by the dengue virus. People get the dengue virus from mosquitoes. Dengue fever is also called break-bone fever, because it can cause so much pain that people feel like their bones are breaking.
Most people with dengue fever can get better just by drinking enough. However, a small number of people get dengue hemorrhagic fever or dengue shock syndrome. These are medical emergencies and can kill a person if they do not get medical treatment.
There is no vaccine that can keep people from getting the dengue virus. There is also no treatment or cure for dengue fever. Doctors can only provide "supportive care," which means they can only treat dengue's symptoms.
Since the 1960s, many more people have been getting dengue fever. Since World War II, dengue has become a problem around the world. It is common in more than 110 countries. Every year, between 50 million and 100 million people get dengue fever.


== Signs and symptoms ==

Most people who get the dengue virus (80%) have no symptoms, or have only mild symptoms (like a basic fever). About 5% of infected people (or 5 out of every 100) get much sicker. A small number of these people have symptoms that could kill them.
After a person gets the dengue virus from a mosquito, it takes between 3 and 14 days for them to get sick. (This is called the virus's incubation period.) Most often, people start to feel sick after 4 to 7 days.
Often, when children have dengue fever, their symptoms are the same as gastroenteritis (stomach flu), like vomiting and diarrhea, or the common cold. However, children are more likely to have bad complications from dengue fever.
Dengue fever happens in three stages: febrile, critical, and recovery.


=== The febrile stage ===
In the febrile stage, people with dengue usually have a high fever. ("Febrile" means that a person has a fever.) The fever is often over 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit). Sometimes the fever gets better, and then comes back.
During the febrile stage, people may also have:
Pain all over their bodies
A headache
A rash (this happens in 50% to 80% of people who get sick from dengue)
Petechiae (small red spots on the skin). These are caused by capillaries (which carry blood) breaking. This makes the blood leak out and show up under the skin.
Small amounts of bleeding from the mucous membranes in the mouth and nose
The febrile stage usually lasts 2 to 7 days. This stage ends when a person's high fever is gone.


=== The critical stage ===
In about 5% of people with dengue fever, the disease goes into a critical stage next. ("Critical" means "very dangerous.") The critical phase usually lasts 1 to 2 days.
During this stage, plasma (the liquid part of blood) leaks out of the body's small blood vessels. The plasma can build up in the chest and abdomen. This is a serious problem for a few reasons.
Plasma carries blood cells, glucose (sugar), electrolytes (salts), and many other important things to the whole body. Every part of the body needs these things to survive. If too much plasma leaks out of the blood vessels, there will not be enough left to carry these things to the body's most important organs. Without these things, the organs cannot work normally. This is called dengue shock syndrome.
Plasma also carries platelets, which help the blood clot (they help stop bleeding). If a person does not have enough platelets, they can have dangerous bleeding. With dengue fever, this bleeding usually happens in the gastrointestinal tract. When a person has bleeding, leaking plasma, and not enough platelets, they have dengue hemorrhagic fever. ("Hemorrhage" means "dangerous bleeding.")


=== The recovery stage ===
In the recovery stage, the plasma that leaked out of the blood vessels is taken back up into the bloodstream. This stage usually lasts 2 to 3 days.
During this stage, people with dengue often feel much better. ("Recovery" means "getting better.") However, they can have very bad itching and a slow heart rate.
Serious problems can also happen during the recovery stage. If a person's body takes too much fluid back up into the bloodstream, it can cause "fluid overload." This can cause fluid to build up in the lungs, which causes breathing problems. Fluid overload can also cause seizures or an altered mental status (changes in a person's thinking and behavior).


=== Complications ===
Every once in a while, dengue can affect other systems in the body. For example, dengue can cause:
Altered mental status: This happens in 0.5% to 6% of people with very bad dengue fever. It can happen when the dengue virus causes an infection in the brain. It can also happen when important organs, like the liver, are not working correctly because of dengue.
Neurological disorders: These are problems with the brain and the nerves, like Guillain–Barré syndrome.
Infection of the heart, or sudden liver failure (these are very uncommon).


== Cause ==

Dengue fever is caused by the dengue virus. In the scientific system that classifies viruses, the dengue virus is part of the family Flaviviridae and the genus Flavivirus. Other viruses that belong to the same family and can make humans sick include yellow fever virus, West Nile virus, Zika virus, Japanese encephalitis virus, and tick-borne encephalitis virus. Most of these viruses are spread by mosquitoes or ticks.


=== How dengue is spread ===

Dengue virus is spread mostly by mosquitoes from the Aedes genus, especially the Aedes aegypti species of mosquito. Aides aegypti is the most likely type of mosquito to spread dengue, because it likes to live close to humans and feed off of people instead of animals. A person can get the dengue virus from just one mosquito bite.
Sometimes, mosquitoes can also get dengue from humans. If a female mosquito bites someone with dengue, the mosquito may get the dengue virus from the person's blood. After about 8 to 10 days, the virus spreads to the mosquito's salivary glands, which make saliva (or "spit"). Now the mosquito will make saliva that is infected with the dengue virus. When the mosquito bites a human, its infected saliva goes into the human and can give that person dengue.
A person can also get the dengue virus if they get a blood transfusion or organ donation from someone who has the virus. In some countries where dengue is common, like Singapore, between 1.6 and 6 blood transfusions out of every 10,000 spread dengue.
The dengue virus can also be spread from a mother to her fetus during pregnancy, or when the child is born. This is called vertical transmission.
Dengue is usually not spread in any other ways.


=== Dengue virus in the human body ===
Once a person gets the dengue virus from a mosquito, the virus attaches to and enters the person's white blood cells. (The white blood cells are part of the immune system, which defends the body by fighting off threats, like infections.) As the white blood cells move around the body, the virus makes copies of itself. The white blood cells react by making many special proteins, like interferon, which tell the immune system to work harder because there is a threat in the body. These proteins cause the fever, flu-like symptoms, and severe pains that happen with dengue.
If a person has a bad infection, the virus makes copies of itself much more quickly inside the body. Because there is a lot more of the virus, it can affect many more organs (like the liver and the bone marrow). The virus can stop the bone marrow from making platelets normally. This makes very bad bleeding much more likely to happen.


=== Risk factors ===
Babies and young children with dengue are more likely than adults to become very sick. Women are more likely than men to get very sick. Dengue can be life-threatening in people with chronic (long-lasting) diseases, like diabetes and asthma.
There are four different types of the dengue virus. Once a person has had one type of the virus, he usually is protected from that type for the rest of his life. However, he will only be protected against the other three types of the virus for a short time. If he later gets one of those three types of the virus, he will be more likely to have serious problems, like dengue shock syndrome or dengue hemorrhagic fever.


== Diagnosis ==
Usually, doctors diagnose dengue by examining the infected person and realizing that their symptoms match dengue. However, when dengue is in its early stages, it can be difficult to tell the difference between this disease and other infections caused by viruses.
The World Health Organization says that a person probably has dengue if:
He has a fever; AND
He has two of these symptoms:
Nausea and vomiting;
A rash;
Pain all over the body;
A low number of white blood cells; or
A positive tourniquet test. (To do this test, a doctor wraps a blood pressure cuff around a person's arm for five minutes, then counts any red spots on the skin. If the person has many spots, they are more likely to have dengue fever.)

The World Health Organization also says that in areas where dengue is common, any warning signs, plus a fever, usually signal that a person has dengue fever.


=== Blood tests ===
Some blood tests show changes when a person has dengue fever. The earliest change is a low number of white blood cells in the blood. A low number of platelets can also signal dengue. Special blood tests can look for the dengue virus itself; the virus's nucleic acids; or the antibodies that the immune system makes to fight off the virus. However, these special tests are expensive. Also, in many areas where dengue is common, most doctors and clinics do not have laboratories for blood tests or special machines.
It can be difficult to tell the difference between dengue fever and chikungunya. Chikungunya is a similar viral infection that has many of the same symptoms of dengue, and happens in the same parts of the world. Dengue can also have some of the same symptoms as other diseases, like malaria, leptospirosis, typhoid fever, and meningococcal disease. Often, before a person is diagnosed with dengue, their doctor will do tests to make sure they do not actually have one of these diseases instead.


=== WHO classification systems ===
In 1997, the World Health Organization (WHO) created a system for describing the different types of dengue fever. Eventually, the WHO decided that this old way of dividing dengue needed to be simpler. It also decided that not everyone with dengue fever fit into the old categories.
In 2009, the WHO changed its system for classifying (dividing) dengue fever. However, the older system often is still used.


==== The old system ====
The WHO's old system divided dengue into three categories:
Undifferentiated fever
Dengue fever
Dengue hemorrhagic fever. This was then divided into four stages, called grades I-IV:
In Grade I, the person has a fever. He also bruises easily or has a positive tourniquet test.
In Grade II, the person bleeds into the skin and other parts of the body.
In Grade III, the person shows signs of circulatory shock. This is called dengue shock syndrome.
In Grade IV, the person has shock so severe that his blood pressure and heartbeat cannot be felt. This is a more serious version of dengue shock syndrome.


==== The new system ====
In 2009, the WHO created a simpler system which divided dengue fever into two types:
Uncomplicated: People who just have the febrile stage of dengue fever, and never go into the critical phase. They get better on their own or just need basic medical help.
Severe: People who have symptoms that could kill them, or have serious complications from dengue.


== Prevention ==
There are no vaccines that can keep people from getting the dengue virus. The best ways to prevent dengue are to protect people from mosquito bites and to control the mosquito population.


=== Controlling mosquitoes and preventing bites ===

The best way to control the A. aegypti mosquito is to get rid of its habitats (the places it lives). The best way to do this is to get rid of areas with standing water (water that does not move). Mosquitoes like standing water and often lay eggs there. Governments can use insecticides or biological control agents to control mosquitoes in these areas. People should empty out open containers of water (so that mosquitoes cannot lay eggs in them). To prevent getting bitten by mosquitoes, people can:
Wear clothing that fully covers their skin
Use bug spray (the type with DEET works best)
Use mosquito netting when they are resting.


=== Integrated Vector Control ===
The WHO suggests a program for preventing dengue (called an "Integrated Vector Control" program) that includes five different parts:
Advocacy, people working together, and legislation (laws) should be used to make public health organizations and communities stronger.
All parts of society should work together. This includes the public sector (like the government), the private sector (like businesses and corporations), and the health care field.
All ways of controlling disease should be brought together.
Decisions should be made based on evidence. This will help make sure that the things that are done to address dengue are helpful.
Areas where dengue is a problem should be given help, so that they can build their abilities to respond well to the disease on their own.


== Treatment ==

There are no specific treatments for dengue fever. No known anti-viral medications (medicines which kill viruses) will kill the dengue virus. Health workers can give "supportive treatment" - treat dengue's symptoms to try to make patients feel better.
Different people need different treatments, depending on their symptoms. Some people can get better just by drinking fluids at home, and checking with their doctor to make sure they are getting better.
Treating dehydration is very important. Sometimes, people are so dehydrated that they need intravenous fluids - fluids given through a needle placed into a vein. Usually, people only need intravenous fluids for a day or two.
Doctors can give medicines like acetaminophen (paracetamol) for fever and pain. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) like ibuprofen and aspirin should not be used because they make bleeding more likely.
People with bad dengue may need blood transfusions. Having extra blood will help a person if their blood pressure is getting very low (like it does in dengue shock syndrome) or if they do not have enough red blood cells in their blood (because they are bleeding from dengue hemorrhagic fever).
When people reach the recovery stage of dengue, doctors usually stop giving intravenous fluids to prevent fluid overload (having too much fluid in the body). If a person gets fluid overload, doctors can give a type of medication called a diuretic, which will make the patient urinate out the extra fluid.


== Prognosis ==
Most people with dengue recover and don't have any problems afterward.
Without treatment, 1% to 5% of infected people (1 to 5 out of every 100) die from dengue. With good treatment, less than 1% die. However, 26% of people with severe dengue die.


== Epidemiology ==
Dengue is common in more than 110 countries. Every year, it infects 50 to 100 million people around the world. It also causes half a million hospitalizations and about 12,500 to 25,000 deaths around the world each year. However, the World Health Organization says that dengue fever is not taken as seriously as it should be. It calls dengue one of 16 "neglected tropical diseases" - diseases which do not get enough attention. In every million people, dengue causes about 1600 years of life to be lost. This is about the same as other tropical and deadly diseases, like tuberculosis. However, the WHO says the neglected tropical diseases, like dengue, do not get the attention and money that is needed to find treatments and cures.
Dengue is becoming much more common around the world. It is the most common viral disease that is spread by arthropods. In 2010, dengue was 30 times more common than it was in 1960. Scientists think dengue may be getting more common because:
More people are living in cities.
There are more people in the world. The world's population is growing.
More people are travelling internationally (between countries).
Global warming is thought to play a part in the increase in dengue.
Dengue happens most around the equator. 2.5 billion people live in areas where dengue happens. 70% of these people live in Asia and the Pacific. In the United States, 2.9% to 8% of people who come back from traveling in areas where dengue happens, and have a fever, were infected while traveling. In this group of people, dengue is the second most common infection to be diagnosed, after malaria.


== History ==
Dengue fever is probably a very old disease. An ancient Chinese medical encyclopedia from the Jin Dynasty (which existed from 265 to 420 AD) talked about a person who probably had dengue. The book talked about a "water poison" that had to do with flying insects.
Written records from the 17th century talk about what may have been epidemics of dengue (where the disease spread very quickly in a short time). The most likely early reports of dengue epidemics are from 1779 and 1780. These reports talk about an epidemic that spread across Asia, Africa, and North America. From that time until 1940, there were not many more epidemics.
In 1906, scientists proved that people were getting infections from Aedes mosquitoes. In 1907, scientists showed that a virus causes dengue. This was just the second disease that was shown to be caused by a virus. (The first was yellow fever.) John Burton Cleland and Joseph Franklin Siler kept studying the dengue virus, and figured out the basics of how the virus spreads.
Dengue began to spread much more quickly during and after World War II. Different types of dengue also spread to new areas. For the first time, people started to get dengue hemorrhagic fever. The first case of dengue hemorrhagic fever happened in the Philippines in 1953. By the 1970s, dengue hemorrhagic fever had become a major cause of death in children. It also spread to the Pacific and the Americas. Dengue hemorrhagic fever and dengue shock syndrome were first reported in Central America and South America in 1981.


=== History of the word ===
It is not clear where the word "dengue" came from. Some people think that it comes from the Swahili phrase Ka-dinga pepo. This phrase talks about the disease being caused by an evil spirit. The Swahili word dinga is thought to come from the Spanish word dengue, which means "careful." That word may have been used to describe a person having bone pain from dengue fever; that pain would make the person walk carefully. However, it is also possible that the Spanish word came from the Swahili word, and not the other way around.
Other people think that the name "dengue" comes from the West Indies. In the West Indies, slaves that had dengue were said to stand and walk like "a dandy." Because of this, the disease was also called "dandy fever."
The name "breakbone fever" was first used by Benjamin Rush, a doctor and United States "Founding Father." In 1789, Rush used the name "breakbone fever" in a report about the 1780 dengue outbreak in Philadelphia. In his official report, Rush mostly used the more formal name "bilious remitting fever".
The term "dengue fever" was not commonly used until after 1828. Before that, different people used different names for the disease. For example, dengue was also called "breakheart fever" and "la dengue." Other names were also used for severe dengue: for example, "infectious thrombocytopenic purpura", "Philippine," "Thai," and "Singapore hemorrhagic fever."


== Research ==
Scientists keep doing research on ways to prevent and treat dengue. People are also working on controlling mosquitoes, creating a vaccine, and creating drugs to fight the virus.
Many simple things have been done to control mosquitoes. Some of these things have worked. For example, guppies (Poecilia reticulata) or copepods can be put in standing water to eat the mosquito larvae (eggs).
Scientists also keep working on creating antiviral drugs to treat attacks of dengue fever and keep people from getting severe complications. They are also working on figuring out how the virus's proteins are structured. This may help them create medications that work well for dengue.


== Notes ==


== References ==A dependent personality disorder (DPD) is a personality disorder that involves a psychological dependence on other people. This personality disorder is a long-term (chronic) condition in which people depend on others to meet their emotional and physical needs. Only a small percentage of people with dependent personality disorders are eventually able to manage on their own.Depression (also called major depressive disorder, unipolar depression or clinical depression) is a mental illness. Many people think that depression just means a person is very sad. However, depression can cause many symptoms in the body as well as mood problems.


== Diagnosis ==
The ICD-10 is used around the world to diagnose people with illnesses like depression. According to the ICD-10, for a person to be diagnosed with depression, their symptoms have to last for at least two weeks. The symptoms must happen every day, or almost every day. These symptoms also have to cause problems in a person's functioning (their work life, family life, social life, or other important parts of their life).
Usually, for depression to be diagnosed, a person must have five or more of these symptoms:
Depressed mood for most of the day (feelings of sadness, emptiness, and/or hopelessness)
Teenagers may be irritable (they may get angry easily) instead of seeming depressed

Feeling much less interested than usual in all, or almost all, activities; or not getting any pleasure from activities
Significant weight loss (when not dieting) or weight gain (generally a change of 5% or more in body weight)
Sleeping more than usual, or having trouble sleeping
Moving around more than usual (psychomotor agitation) or moving more slowly than usual (psychomotor retardation)
Feeling tired or not having energy, nearly every day
Feeling worthless or guilty
Not being able to think, concentrate, or make decisions normally
Thinking a lot about death (not just being afraid to die)
Most people who have not had depression do not completely understand its effects. Instead, they see it as simply being sad. Since it is not understood, many people criticize people with depression for not helping themselves.[source?]
Some people with depression die by suicide. Depression is one of the mental illnesses that can cause a person to have suicidal thoughts.


== Prevalence ==

It is impossible to get an exact number of how many people have depression. There are many reasons for this. For example:
People may not admit to having depression, because of the stigma about depression
Some people may not be correctly diagnosed with depression
Different doctors and mental health workers may diagnose depression differently
The number of people diagnosed with depression is different in different cultures, and among men and women


=== In different cultures ===
Major depression is one of the most common mental illnesses in the United States. In 2014, 15.7 million adults in the United States had at least one episode of major depression. This is about 6.7% of all adults in the United States.
Around the world, depression causes more disability than any other mental health or behavioral illness, according to the World Health Organization.
However, the prevalence of depression is different in different cultures and countries.
Prince (1968) found virtually no depression in most Asian and African countries. However, psychologists such as Zhang and Kleinman have found disorders with similar symptoms, but different names. For example, in the 1980s, Zhang found that in China, there was little mention of depression. However, instead, a disorder called Neurasthenia was far more common. When interviewing Neurasthenia patients, Zhang found that their symptoms matched the symptoms of depression by over 80%. While the term "depression" was practically unheard of in China, Neurasthenia could well have been a similar disorder – or the same thing.
It is also important to take in different cultures' ways of classifying depression. For example, in China, many people believe doctors solve physical symptoms, not mental problems. This may have made it more likely for "depression" to be diagnosed as a medical condition like "Neurasthenia."


=== In men and women ===
Typically, in most Western cultures, women are diagnosed with depression twice as often as men. However, men are often more likely than women to die by suicide.


== Depression in children ==
Depression in children can be harder to see. Children who are depressed may have a loss of appetite, meaning that they do not want to eat. They may also be clearly having more trouble in everyday life than before. For example, they may have sleep problems like nightmares; new problems with behaviour or grades at school; or be more irritable than usual.


== Types of depression ==
Major depressive disorder is also referred to as major, biochemical, clinical, endogenous, or biological depression. It may also be called unipolar affective disorder.
There are many subtypes of depression:
Melancholia, or melancholic depression, is very severe (bad). It can cause many physical changes, like sleep and appetite changes. It can also cause a person to change their behavior - for example, by not wanting to be around other people.
Psychotic depression is much like melancholia, but with hallucinations or delusions.
Atypical depression causes anxiety and panic attacks.
Chronic dysthymic disorder is a long-term, mild depression that lasts for at least two years. It often begins in adolescence and lasts for many years.
Seasonal affective disorder (SAD) is when the depression seems to be related to the winter season. It usually starts in the autumn and goes away in the spring every year. It is common in Alaska, Canada, and Scandinavia (Sweden, Norway, Denmark, and Finland), but not in Iceland.


== Causes of depression ==
As of 2016, scientists believe there is no one cause of depression. There is a lot of argument over whether depression is caused by biological, cognitive, or sociocultural factors:
Biological explanations of depression focus on changes in brain chemicals (neurotransmitters).
Cognitive explanations of depression focus on how the way we think (cognition) affects our mood. These explanations say that if a person thinks negatively, this thinking can make them feel negatively about themselves and the world around them.
Sociocultural explanations of depression blame stressful things like divorce, losing a job, bullying, and poverty for causing depression.
The United States National Institutes of Health say that depression comes from the brain. However, scientists are still trying to find out exactly why it happens.


=== Possible causes ===
There are many theories about what causes depression. These theories include:[source?]
Heredity (someone's genes): Depression often runs in families. However, people can get depression even if they are not related to anyone else who has it.
Physiology: The amounts of some chemicals in the brain. Serotonin is the main chemical in the brain that has to do with happiness. Many antidepressant medications work by balancing the amount of serotonin in the brain.
Psychological factors: Low self-esteem and harmful thinking
Early experiences: Events such as the death of a parent or guardian, abandonment or rejection, neglect, chronic illness, and severe physical, psychological, or sexual abuse.
Life experiences: Losing a job, homelessness, problems with money, death of a loved one, relationship problems, separation from a partner, being a victim of crime, or other life problems can cause depression.
Medical conditions: Some illnesses, such as hypothyroidism, hepatitis, mononucleosis, or head injuries, may contribute to depression.
Alcohol and other drugs: Alcohol can make people depressed. If a person abuses alcohol, benzodiazepine-based tranquillizers, sleeping medications, or narcotics, it can affect how long their depression lasts and how bad it is. Some medicines like birth control pills and steroids may also contribute to depression.
Pesticides: Several scientific studies  have found statistical links between depression and some pesticides.
Some depressed people also have other mental disorders, such as personality disorders and anxiety disorders.


== Treatment ==
Depression is usually treated with a combination of medication and other therapy. Good exercise helps deal with depression, since exercise releases chemicals that put a person in a better mood. Having a supportive group of friends and doing outside activities can also help prevent or ease depression.


=== Medication ===
There are many medications that can help with depression. Many of these are called antidepressants. Examples of medications used to treat depression include:
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). These are now the most commonly used type of antidepressant medicine. These drugs work by allowing the brain to have more serotonin. They have fewer side effects than older antidepressants. Examples include fluoxetine (Prozac), paroxetine (Paxil), and sertraline (Zoloft).
Tricyclic antidepressants. These are an older type of antidepressant. They are not used often today because they have many bad side effects and do not work as well as SSRIs. An example is nortriptyline (Allegron).
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs). They may be used if other antidepressant medications do not work well. This kind of medicine cannot be taken with many different foods and other medications.
Sometimes, antidepressant medicine works better when it is used together with another drug that is not an antidepressant. These "augmentor" drugs include:
Tranquillizers and sedatives. These can help people sleep better and feel less anxious.
Antipsychotics. These can help keep stop mood swings. They can also make hallucinations better, or make them go away completely.
Lithium . This is a mood stabilizer often used for bipolar disorder, but it can also help people with depression.
If people with depression do not take their medicine the right way, the depression can get worse. A doctor must help when they want to change to another medication, or to take a different amount of a medication than before.


=== Psychotherapy ===
Psychotherapy is often a helpful treatment for depression. In psychotherapy, a therapist helps a person to understand and solve problems which cause depression. The therapist also helps the person learn skills for dealing with their depression. 
Psychotherapy can help a person make changes in the way they think, in order to help with life problems and understand what makes depression worse. The most effective psychotherapy for depression is Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT).[source?] This teaches a person to think in a more rational, positive, realistic manner.


=== Surgeries and procedures ===
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), also called electroshock therapy or shock therapy, is used to treat a small percentage of severely depressed people. ECT uses a small amount of electricity to cause an epileptic seizure while the patient is under anesthesia. This may cause some memory loss (amnesia) or other side effects.
In the past, doctors used different ways of treating depression. These are rarely used any more. They include:
Insulin shock treatment. The doctor would lower a patient's blood sugar so much that the patient would have a seizure.
Lobotomy. This is a form of surgery. The surgeon would use an ice pick or a surgical knife to cut nerves in the frontal lobe of the brain.


== Related pages ==
Dysthymia, a long-lasting mild depression
Mania
Bipolar disorder, a mood disorder which involves both mania and depression
Cyclothymia, a mild form of bipolar disorder


== Further reading ==
Study showing genetic links between depression and four other major psychiatric disorders: autism ADHD, bipolar disorder, and schizophrenia
5 Disorders Share Genetic Risk Factors, Study Finds (The New York Times, February 28, 2013)
Psychiatric Disorders Linked Genetically (The Wall Street Journal, February 27, 2013)


== References ==


== Books ==
Books by psychologists/psychiatrists:
Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw, B. F., Emery, G. (1987). Cognitive therapy of depression. New York: Guilford.
Klein, D. F., & Wender, P. H. (1993). Understanding depression: A complete guide to its diagnosis and treatment. New York: Oxford University Press.
Weissman, M. M., Markowitz, J. C., & Klerman, G. L. (2000). Comprehensive guide to interpersonal psychotherapy. New York: Basic Books.

Books by persons suffering or having suffered from depression:
Smith, Jeffery (2001). Where the roots reach for water: A personal and natural history of melancholia. New York: North Point Press.
Solomon, Andrew (2001). The noonday demon: An atlas of depression. New York: Sribner.
Styron, William (1992). Darkness visible: A memoir of madness. New York: Vintage Books/Random House.
Wolpert, Lewis (2001). Malignant sadness: The anatomy of depression. London: Faber and Faber.

Self-help (bibliotherapeutic) books:
Lewinsohn, P. M., Munoz, R. F, Youngren, M. A., Zeiss, A. M. (1992). Control your depression. New York: Fireside/Simon&Schuster.


== Other websites ==
Clinical-Depression
Internet Mental Health: Major Depressive Disorder
Depression Alliance website (UK charity) [useful information]
Depression Fact Sheets [Facts about the causes, symptoms, and treatment of depressive disorders.]
Detailed information [concerning Emil Kraepelin, who identified Manic Depression]There is another type of diabetes, called diabetes insipidus
Diabetes is the condition that results from lack of insulin in a person's blood, or when their body has a problem using the insulin it produces (Insulin resistance). There are other kinds of diabetes, like diabetes insipidus. However, when people say "diabetes", they usually mean diabetes mellitus. People with diabetes mellitus are called "diabetics".
Glucose is not regular sugar that is available in stores and supermarkets. Glucose is a natural carbohydrate that our bodies use as a source of energy. The kind of sugar sold in supermarkets is called sucrose, and is much different from glucose. High concentrations of glucose can be found in soft drinks and fruits.
Glucose level in the blood is controlled by several hormones. Hormones are chemicals in your body that send messages from cells to other cells. Insulin is a hormone made by the pancreas. When you eat, the pancreas makes insulin to send a message to other cells in the body. This insulin tells the cells to take up glucose from the blood. The glucose is used by cells for energy. Extra glucose that is not needed right away is stored in some cells as glycogen. When you are not eating, cells break down glycogen into glucose to use as energy.


== Types of diabetes ==


=== Type 1 diabetes mellitus ===
Type 1 diabetes mellitus happens when the part of the pancreas that makes insulin is destroyed by that person’s own immune system. When the pancreas does not make insulin, glucose – sugar – in the blood cannot get into the parts of the body that need sugar to live. In order to live, a person with Type 1 diabetes must take insulin for the rest of their life. They need to check their blood sugar level on a regular basis, often, many times each day. Type 1 diabetes happens most of the time in younger people, however it can occur in adults, although this is much less common. About 1 out of every 10 people with diabetes have Type 1 Diabetes.


=== Type 2 diabetes mellitus ===
Type 2 diabetes mellitus is an illness very different from Type 1 diabetes. In Type 2 diabetes, the person makes insulin, but either the insulin does not work in that person’s body as it should, or they do not make enough insulin to process the glucose. When insulin does not work as it should, glucose (sugar) in the blood cannot get into the parts of the body that need sugar. Type 2 diabetes happens most of the time in an older person who is overweight.


=== Gestational diabetes ===
Gestational diabetes mellitus is like Type 2 diabetes. It happens to some women when they are pregnant.


=== Other types of diabetes ===
Other types of diabetes include but are not limited to:
Latent autoimmune diabetes of adults (LADA)
Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY)


== Complications of diabetes ==

Complications are problems that happen because of a disease. In the case of diabetes, there are two kinds of complications. The first kind happens quickly and can be dealt with quickly. This kind is called an acute complication. The other kind is caused by the blood glucose being too high for many years, and is called a chronic complication or long-term complication.
Excess blood glucose is called 'hyperglycemia'. If very high, it can cause acute complications. In Type 1 diabetics, one of these complications is diabetic ketoacidosis which is a medical emergency and can often be detected by a fruity smell on the breath. Another acute complication, more common in Type 2 diabetics, is non-ketotic hyperosmolar coma which is also very dangerous.
Too low blood glucose is called hypoglycemia. It can also cause acute complications. If too low, diabetics can have many symptoms such as sweating, trembling, anger (or feeling passive), and possibly even passing out. Diabetics with hypoglycemia may be confused or even unconscious. They may appear to have drank too much alcohol. Severe hypoglycemia is very dangerous and can cause death. The best treatment of hypoglycemia is avoiding it. If it happens, eating food containing glucose (for example, table sugar) usually improves the condition quickly. Sometimes it is treated by giving an injection of a medicine called 'glucagon'. Glucagon is a hormone made by the pancreas. It has the opposite effect of insulin. Administering glucagon will cause the blood glucose level to rise by forcing stored glucose into the blood. Hypoglycemia is usually caused by too much diabetic medication, insufficient food, too much exercise, or a combination of these.
Chronic complications are mostly caused by hyperglycemia (but not high enough to always cause acute complications). It causes damage to blood vessels and nerves. Damage to blood vessels can eventually cause strokes, heart attacks, kidney failure, blindness, slow healing of skin breaks - with added possibility of infection - and even amputations from poor circulation (decreased blood flow, usually to the feet and toes). Damage to nerves can make diabetics not feel pain (this usually happens in their feet). This causes them to have more injuries and not realize they have hurt themselves. Damage to nerves can also cause pain even when there's no real injury. It's a type of phantom pain or ghost pain. The pain can be so intense that strong pain medication may be required.


== Monitoring of diabetes ==

Because of the damage caused by high blood glucose, it is important to treat diabetes mellitus. The goal is to maintain a normal blood glucose level. The normal range for blood glucose is 80-120 mg/dL (milligrams of glucose per deciliter of blood) or 3.5-7 mmol/l (millimole per liter of blood.) These are different ways of saying the same thing, much like yards and meters are different units of distance measurement.
Diabetics should check their blood glucose often. This is to make sure they do not get hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia. A glucometer is a battery powered measuring device that checks the blood glucose level. Diabetics often carry a glucometer with them and check their blood sugar level several times in a day. They may also suffer severe constipation and frequent urination.
Doctors may also use a blood test called a hemoglobin A1C. This is sometimes written Hgb-A1C or other ways; there's no standard name. This tells the doctor what the average blood glucose has been for about the past 90 days. If the level has been too high, it may indicate new medication, different medication dosage, or better diet may be needed.
Diabetics must be monitored for signs of complications due to diabetes. They should see an eye doctor regularly to be checked for damage to the blood vessels in the eyes. If this is not found and treated early, it can cause blindness. They should have their urine or blood checked regularly for signs of kidney damage. They must check their feet for cuts, bruises, blisters, and so on at least every day. And they should have their feet checked regularly for nerve damage, circulation problems, and infections.


== Treatment of diabetes ==

The most important goal in diabetes is to keep the blood glucose level as close to normal as possible. Since it usually goes up after eating, and down after exercise, coping with it sensibly is often complex, and usually takes care and thought. Treatment differs between Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes. People with Type 1 diabetes are treated with insulin. People with Type 2 usually begin with diet, exercise, and weight loss, perhaps moving to medication (and, though not as common, insulin).
Education is important for both types of diabetes. Diabetics must learn about diet. They learn how to estimate and keep track of how much carbohydrate, protein, and fat are in different foods. They plan their meals to have the right amount of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. Patients with Type 1 may decide how much insulin to take before a meal based on how much they will eat.
Diabetics must also be careful about exercise. Exercise is important to stay healthy, but intense or extended periods of exercise can cause hypoglycemia. As a result, diabetics must plan exercise carefully.
In addition to controlling blood glucose level, other treatments may be needed. Diabetics often have blood vessel diseases, so it is important to pay attention to other diseases which may affect blood vessels. In people with diabetes, treating high blood pressure (hypertension) and high cholesterol is more important than usual. Both of these diseases damage blood vessels. The treatment goals can change for diabetics. For instance, in people without diabetes, blood pressure should be 140/90 or less. In diabetics it should be 130/80 or less.


== Other websites ==
Resource site for people with diabetes
World Health Organization Diabetes Program
Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation International
American Diabetes Association
Diabetes
Diabetes Forum
Young Diabetic Community
Canadian Diabetes Association
Diabetes Australia
Diabetes New Zealand
Diabetes UK
DiabetesFriends.net - Social Networking for Diabetics
Diabetes Forum UK


== References ==
Property of Little B.B.Diabetic retinopathy, is the most common eye disease caused by diabetes, it damages the retinas in both eyes, causing vision problems which may lead to blindness.
It affects up to 80 percent of all patients who have had diabetes for 10 years or more. However it is possible that at least 90% of these new cases could be kept from becoming severe with early diagnosis and proper treatment.


== Signs and symptoms ==

Diabetic retinopathy often has no early warning signs. As new blood vessels form at the back of the eye as a part of proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR), they can bleed (ocular hemorrhage) and blur vision. The first time this happens, it may not be very severe. In most cases, it will leave just a few specks of blood, or spots, floating in a person's visual field, though the spots often go away after a few hours.
These spots are often followed within a few days or weeks by a much greater leakage of blood, which blurs vision. In extreme cases, a person will only be able to tell light from dark in that eye. It may take the blood anywhere from a few days to months or even years to clear from the inside of the eye, and in some cases the blood will not clear. These types of large hemorrhages tend to happen more than once, often during sleep.
On funduscopic exam, a doctor will see spots, flame hemorrhages, and dot-blot hemorrhages.
Elevation of blood-glucose levels can also cause edema (swelling) of the crystalline lens as a result of sorbitol (sugar alcohol) building up in the lens. This edema often causes temporary myopia (nearsightedness). A common sign of swelling of the lens is blurring of distance vision while near vision remains adequate.


== Treatment ==


=== Scatter laser surgery ===

During the first three stages of diabetic retinopathy, no treatment is needed, unless there is macular edema. To prevent diabetic retinopathy from getting worse, diabetics should control their levels of blood sugar, blood pressure, and blood cholesterol.
Proliferative retinopathy is treated with scatter laser surgery, which helps to shrink the abnormal blood vessels. During the surgery 1,000 to 2,000 laser burns are placed in the areas of the retina away from the macula, causing the abnormal blood vessels to shrink. Two or more sessions usually are required to complete treatment. There may be some loss of peripheral (side) vision, and color vision, and night vision may also be slightly reduced.
Scatter laser treatment works best before the abnormal fragile, new blood vessels which grow because of the disease have started to bleed. Treatment may still be possible after bleeding has begun in some cases.


=== Focal laser surgery ===
Macular edema is treated with focal laser treatment. Up to several hundred small laser burns are placed in the areas of retinal leakage surrounding the macula. These burns cauterize the blood vessels, reduces tha amount of leakage and fluid build-up in the retina. The surgery is usually done in one session but further treatments may be needed. If both eyes are affected by macular edema only one is treated at a time usually a few weeks apart.
Focal laser treatment stabilizes vision and reduces the risk of vision loss by 50 percent. In a small number of cases, if vision is lost, it can be improved.


=== Viteroctomy ===
Viteroctomy is the surgical removal of the vitreous humur. The vitreous humur is a clear, thick, gel-like fluid, that fills the inside of the eyeball and helps it to maintain its shape. This treatment is done in cases of proliferative retinopathy that causes severe scar tissue to form on the retina or when new blood vessels continue to grow on the retina after laser treatments.


=== Drug treatment ===
According to research done by the National Eye Institute, prompt treatment of diabetic macular edema with the drug Lucentis, with or without laser treatment, resulted in better vision than laser treatment alone, or steroid injections. When injected into the eye, Lucentis, and two other similar drugs, Avastin or Aylea, reduce fluid leakage and interfere with the growth of new blood vessels in the retina.


== References ==


== Other websites ==
Diabetic Retinopathy Resource Guide from the National Eye Institute (NEI).Dissociative identity disorder (DID), is a mental disorder. It was called multiple personality disorder (MPD). It is listed in the mental health diagnosis manual DSM IV.
This is one of the most controversial mental disorders because people disagree about what causes it. The main symptoms of DID are a person showing two or more "identities" or "personality states". The person behaves differently depending which identity is in control. The second important symptom is when a person forgets important, personal things which people normally do not forget.
A person is not diagnosed with DID if the symptoms are caused by drugs, illness or (with children) pretending to play with imaginary friends. Doctors must also rule out pretending to have DID for attention or sympathy, and malingering (pretending to have DID for some personal gain). Most patients with DID are also diagnosed with other mental disorders.


== Definitions ==
The DSM IV uses the terms "identity", "personality states" and "alternate identities" when talking about DID and other people use the term "alters" to mean the same thing. These words can be confusing since not everyone uses the same definition. Professionals have not agreed on a specific definition for a personality; other terms, including dissociation and amnesia, may also be defined differently by different professionals. When talking about DID, saying someone changes personalities or alters means the person speaks and acts differently, and usually responds to a different name.
Dissociation is a symptom. Most people experience normal dissociation, where they stop paying attention to what is happening around them. People with DID have pathological dissociation, which is much more serious. It involves problems with memory and attention that make it hard for people to work, shop and have relationships with other people. Everyone can dissociate but some people can do it much more easily and to an extreme that can be unhealthy. Some doctors think trauma causes the dissociation that is seen in disorders like DID.


== Signs and symptoms ==
According to the DSM-IV, the symptoms of DID are "the presence of two or more distinct identities or personality states" (which are often called "alters"), as well as forgetting things that people normally don't forget. Also, the symptoms cannot be caused by drugs or normal childhood play. People can report having a lot of alters, or just a couple. Most people diagnosed with DID have less than ten, though some have said they have several thousand. A person diagnosed with DID cannot be diagnosed with another dissociative disorder. Because people with DID hear voices of different alters, it may be confused with schizophrenia. However, the two problems are very different and doctors can usually tell if a patient has DID or schizophrenia by asking the right questions. DID is always diagnosed by what patients tell their doctors and what the doctor thinks this means. There are no objective tests using blood or machines that can tell if someone has DID. Though people have tried diagnosing and studying DID using medical imaging or brain scanning.


=== Diagnosis ===
The DSM uses the following criteria to diagnose DID:
At least two "distinct identities" that alternate control of behavior
Inability to recall "important personal information too great" to be attributed to "ordinary forgetfulness"
None of the above are due to the direct physiological effects of a substance or a general medical condition
The International Classification of Diseases-10 (ICD-10) uses the term multiple personality disorder instead of dissociative identity disorder. It classifies DID in section F44.8, "Other dissociative [conversion] disorders".


== Causes ==
There are two main ideas about what causes DID, but there is still disagreement about which is correct. The trauma model says that DID is caused by parents or family that abuse or neglect their children. Some of these children deny the abuse is happening or pretend it is happening to someone else, and this eventually becomes a different identity or alter. Most people diagnosed with DID say they remember being abused by their parents or other caregivers when they were children. When asked about their childhood, patients with DID are more likely to say they were abused or neglected than people with any other diagnosis. However, the idea that DID develops in childhood is disputed because childhood memories are not very reliable and it is not clear if the abuse actually happened. Though DID has been diagnosed in children, there are reasons to believe the diagnosis is because of the influence of parents and doctors rather than abuse. There is not enough good scientific evidence about DID in childhood to be sure DID is actually caused by abuse or something else.
The iatrogenic or sociocognitive model (SCM) of DID says it is created during psychotherapy when the therapist creates false memories and patients become convinced they have multiple personalities. Some patients may be more likely to develop DID in these circumstances because they are naturally more likely to accept their therapists are right about DID. SCM supporters also think that patients have seen DID in movies and books, and this shows them how people with DID are supposed to behave, which makes it easier for them to change their behavior when they are supposed to be a new alter. They also say the criteria used by the DSM are unclear which makes it hard to agree whether a patient has DID or another diagnosis.
A middle position says that trauma may change how the brain remembers things which makes it easier to remember things that did not actually happen. It has also been suggested that early trauma may make children more likely to use their imaginations to pretend abuse or other painful situations are not happening, and if they enter therapy when they are older, it is easier for therapists to convince them they have DID.


== Treatment ==
There is no treatment approach that has been scientifically proven to work. Most therapists who treat patients with DID use several different approaches. Therapy usually lasts for several years, and does not always work. Some therapists try to reduce or eliminate the alters so the patient only has one personality, while others do not. The ISSTD recommends first improving a patient's ability to deal with symptoms and live more normal lives, then trying to deal with traumatic memories. The final step is bringing all the identities together so the patient can access all of their memories.


== Prognosis ==
Sometimes patients with DID will get better without any help, but this is not common. Patients with more diagnoses than just DID often take longer to improve.


== Epidemiology ==
There have been no large-scale studies to learn how common DID is. The ISSTD says DID occurs in between 1 and 3% in the general population, and between 1 and 5% in groups of patients in hospitals. DID is more common in women than in men but this may be caused by men with DID being sent to prison instead of hospitals. The number of people diagnosed with DID increased from about 200 in 1970 to about 20,000 in the 1990s. According to the ISSTD this is because doctors did not have the training or experience to recognize DID. Instead they diagnosed people with depression, PTSD or borderline personality disorder. People who support the SCM say the increase in diagnoses was because a small number of doctors diagnosed a large number of people and because a large number of therapists began using types of psychotherapy that made people think they had DID.


== History and culture ==

Before 1900 it was thought DID was caused by spirits or ghosts who controlled people's behavior. The first case of DID described in medicine was in 1646 by the Swiss doctor Paracelsus. DID was very uncommon until the 1970s. Between 1980 and 1990 the number of cases reported in medicine went from about 200 to more than 20,000. In 1994, the 4th edition of the DSM was published, which changed the name from "multiple personality disorder" to "dissociative identity disorder". The DSM also changed how DID was diagnosed. Many scientific articles were written about DID during the same period, though after 1995 the number of articles published every year decreased. Today there is little research on DID.
Even though DID is a very rare, there are a lot of books, plays and movies about people with DID. In 1886 Robert Louis Stevenson published the short book The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde which was very popular. People later thought that Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde were examples of someone with DID. The Three Faces Of Eve was a movie made in 1957 about a woman with DID. Sybil, a popular book about a woman with DID, was published in 1973. It was made into a movie in 1976, and a second time in 2007. A survey done in 2001 of American and Canadian psychiatrists found that there was a lot of disagreement and skepticism about diagnosing DID and if the diagnosis was based on enough good quality science.


== DID in the legal system ==
Lawyers and doctors who work with the law also consider DID to be very controversial. Since the 1990s, DID has become more common in courts. People have tried to avoid going to prison for such crimes as murder and serial rape by claiming to have DID, and lawyers and judges are concerned about people pretending to have DID to avoid going to prison. The first time this happened was in 1976, and since that time most people who commit crimes and claim it was because of DID have gone to prison.


== References ==Diverticulitis is a disease of the digestive system. It is caused by inflammation of pouches (diverticula) in the walls of the bowel. It usually occurs in the large intestine. Diverticula can also be in the upper digestive tract at the level of the esophagus, stomach and small intestine.


== Symptoms ==
Symptoms of diverticulitis depend on the extent of inflammation in the intestine. Diverticulitis can be very painful. The pain is usually present in the lower abdomen on the left side. People with diverticulitis can also have nausea, vomiting, difficulty or pain while passing urine and changes in bowel habits.


== Complications ==
One of the complications of diverticulitis can be the formation of an abscess in the abdominal cavity. The inflammation or infection can then reach the abdominal wall and causes peritonitis. This infection can also spread to other parts of the body such as organs near the intestine, causing sepsis, which is dangerous. In addition, a fistula may form between the intestine and other organs. Diverticulitis may also cause a blockage in the colon.


== Prevention ==
To prevent diverticulitis, it is important to be active and to have a diet rich in fibers. These include eating (fruits, vegetables, legumes and cereals). It is also possible to reduce the risks of diverticulitis in several ways: chew foods before swallowing, defecate as soon as you feel the need, eat less fats and meats, do more physical activities, eat probiotics and drink water regularly.


== Diagnosis ==
To diagnose diverticulitis, it is important to do a barium enema X-ray to see the shape of the intestine wall. Diverticula can be seen with a axial tomographie scan (CT scan). It is also possible to prescribe an abdominal radiograph to indicate if there is a perforation. After the acute phase or absence of acute diverticulitis, the doctor can prescribe a colonoscopy to look at the colon and determine the evolution of the disease.


== Surgery ==
The resection of the colon is the procedure most often used to treat severe diverticulitis. It is also possible to do a resection of the diseased part of the colon and make a colostomy. In fact, if a diverticulitis is too large, a colostomy could be necessary either temporarily or permanently.


== References ==Drug addiction, also called substance dependence or dependence syndrome, is a condition where a person feels a strong need to take a drug. Addiction also involves other behaviours. These include finding it difficult to control the need to use the drug and feeling the use of the drug to be more important than more normal things such as family or work. When the person does not use the drug for an amount of time, they may suffer from withdrawal.
When a person is addicted, they are usually addicted to a class (a specific kind) of drug. For example: Heroin is a drug that is in the Opiate class. Which means that a person addicted to Heroin may also be seen to have an addiction to other opiates such as Morphine.
A person who may easily become addicted to drugs is said to have an addictive personality. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders defines drug addiction as a mental disorder. Drug addiction is often linked with other mental disorders.


== References ==Duodenal cancer is a type of cancer in the small intestine. It is something like gastric cancer and colorectal cancer. Familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP), Gardner Syndrome, Lynch Syndrome, Muir-Torre syndrome, Celiac sprue, Puetz-Jeghers, Crohn's Disease and Juvenile Polyposis Syndrome are risk factors for having this cancer.
The duodenum is the first part of the small intestine. It is located between the stomach and the jejunum. After foods combine with stomach acid, they go down into the duodenum where they mix with bile from the gall bladder and digestive juices from the pancreas.


== References ==Ebola virus is a very dangerous virus. It belongs to the Filoviridae family and is responsible for a severe disease characterized by the sudden onset of hemorrhagic fever accompanied by other nonspecific signs and symptoms. "Hemorrhagic" means that the victim will bleed a lot, inside and outside their body. The virus attacks almost every organ and tissue of the human body resulting in multi-organ dysfunction. Out of every 10 people who get Ebola, on average five to nine die. There are four kinds of Ebola virus that can cause the disease. The virus was first found in Sudan. It is found in Africa, with very few cases in Europe and the United States.


== Transmission ==
The Ebola virus that makes people sick lives in the blood and other liquids and wet things in some kinds of non-human animals without killing them. Scientists think the animals it lives in are mainly some kinds of monkeys or fruit bats. When people touch animals that have the virus, or wet things that came out of those animals, they can get sick.
Ebola cannot be caught through the air, or by being near sick people. The virus can only go from liquids into people's bodies. This means Ebola can be caught by touching a sick person's blood, saliva, mucus, semen, diarrhea, vomit, or other fluids that come out of a sick person's body.
If a person does not die from the disease, he can still give other people the infection by having sex for nearly another two months after they stop being sick. This is because the virus can still be in the man's semen after a long time.
Template:Pathogenesis
1. Once the virus enters the human body via mucosal surfaces, abrasions or injuries in the skin or by direct parental transmission, it fuses with the cells lining the respiratory tract, eyes, or body cavities.
2. It invades the macrophages and dendritic immune cells and releases its genetic content. The cell explosion triggers the secretion of proinflammatory cytokines initiating a ‘cytokine storm’. The genetic material takes over the cell machinery to replicate itself; new copies of the virus are formed and released into the system.
3. The virus then, goes on to attack spleen, kidneys and even the brain. The blood vessels leak blood and fluid into the surrounding tissues. This atypical clotting and bleeding at the same time manifests externally in the form of rashes.
4. The virus causes the shutdown of other vital organs such as liver and lungs too. In fact, it is able to invade almost all human cells through different attachment mechanisms for each cell type (except for lymphocytes). The very cells that are meant to fight infection are used as carriers to spread infection to other body parts
5. It has been found that the ebola-infected cells do not undergo normal apoptosis, but exhibit vacuolization and signs of necrosis.


== Symptoms ==
When people get Ebola the first symptoms look like some other diseases. People get a fever and feel very tired. Their head, stomach, joints, and throat might hurt. Sometimes, people think they have other diseases like malaria or typhoid fever.
Later, people get much sicker. They bleed both inside and outside their bodies. They have blood in their diarrhea and vomit. They bleed from their noses, mouths, and genitals/sex organs. They get shock: low blood pressure, fast pulse (heart rate), and low blood circulation to the body. Their organs might stop working. Ebola also causes stiffness throughout the body which makes it hard for sick people to move.
Five to nine out of every ten people who get sick with Ebola die.


== Treatment ==
There is no cure for Ebola, but if people get care quickly from doctors and nurses at a hospital, more of them live. People with Ebola need a lot of fluids to replace fluids lost from diarrhea, vomiting, and bleeding. The most important care is giving them water with a very small amount of salt and sugar in it. This is called oral rehydration. It helps to replace their fluids and blood. It is also important to give medicines in case they get bad blood pressure and blood circulation.


== Prevention ==
In December 2016, a study found the VSV-EBOV vaccine to be very effective (in the neighborhood of 70–100%) against the Ebola virus, making it the first vaccine against the disease.
Many Ebola vaccine candidates had been developed in the decade prior to 2014, but as of October 2014, none had yet been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for use in humans.


== Research ==
World Community Grid is a computing project that is seeking possible drug treatments. People donate the spare time on their computers to the project.


== Reference ==The elbow is a hinge-joint between the bones of the upper and lower arm. It joins the humerus of the upper arm and the radius and ulna of the forearm together. Everyone has 2 elbows. It allows the lower arm to be extended or retracted (moved in). The elbow also allows the arm to turn. It moves by using three ligaments: the anterior, posterior, ulnar collateral and radial collateral ligaments.Endothelium is a layer of cells that line the walls of the circulatory system which carries blood around the body. The cells form a membrane so that certain substances, such as nutrients, can move through the walls. In an adult human there is about 1 kg of endothelium cells, which would cover an area of about 7m2. The endothelium plays an important part in controlling the flow of blood around the body.


== References ==Eosinophil granulocytes, usually called eosinophils or eosinophiles, are granulocyte white blood cells that fight off certain parasites and infections in vertebrates. When they are activated, eosinophils release a cocktail of proteins from their granules, including heparin. Like mast cells and basophils, their main targets are parasites, and they are part causes of the syndromes called asthma and allergy.
Eosinophils make up 1-6% of white blood cells circulating in the body. They are similar in size to neutrophils but have reddish-orange granules (when stained with eosin) and a bilobed nucleus. Eosinophil granulocytes are important defenders against large, multi-cellular parasites, such as worms and flukes. Their numbers increase during a parasitic infection.The epididymis is the part of the human male reproductive system. It is the tube that holds the testicles in place. It stretches from the back of each testicle to the van deferens.


== Parts ==
The dinges is made up of three parts:
The head (Caput)
The body (Corpus)
The tail (Cauda)


== Uses ==
Sperm made in the testis go into the head (caput) of the epididymis, go through the body (corpus) and stop at the tail (cauda), where they are stored. When sperm are first made and travel to the head, they are not yet ready to be ejaculated. They cannot swim or fertilize an egg. By the time they reach the tail, the sperm can fertilize an egg. The sperm are transferred to the Seminal visicle through the vas deferens. The sperm can not swim yet, so muscle contractions push the sperm to the seminal vesicle where final development is finished. .
When the sperm are ejaculated, they move through the tail of the epididymis. There are so many sperm that they cannot swim, but use peristalsis from muscles in the vas deferens.


== Disease ==
An injury or infection of the epididymis causes epididymitis, a painful condition that can take months to heal. Sometimes the testicle has to be removed. There does not seem to be any single cause, or treatment for this condition. Some doctors treat it with antibiotics, some take a "wait and see" attitude. At times just one testicle is affected and at others, both.


== Pictures ==


== References ==An erection (pronounced ee-REK-shən) of a body part such as a man's penis, a woman's clitoris or a nipple refers to it becoming larger and harder.
The term erection is most often used to refer to an erection of the penis. It is widely believed that a man's penis needs to be erect in order for him to take part in sexual intercourse and penetrate his partner's vagina and to ejaculate semen, but all are possible without an erection. For an erection to take place, a man must be sexually aroused (made sexually excited) or stimulated. This can happen if he is touched sexually, or even if he is not touched – for example, if he sees a naked person or thinks about having sex with someone else. Tissues in the penis called the corpus spongiosum penis and corpora cavernosa penis fill with blood, causing the penis to become longer, thicker, harder and to stand upright. A man's erection usually stops if he is no longer sexually aroused, or after he has had an orgasm and has ejaculated.


== Overview ==
Erect penises have appeared in erotic (sexually exciting) art for a very long time. Pictures of men with erections appear on ancient objects and in paintings. In the past, the erect penis was also a symbol or sign of health and fertility (the ability to give life). Ancient Egyptians, Greeks and Romans believed in gods that had erect penises. Today, erect penises do not often appear in artworks or movies because many people think that showing a man's penis when it is erect is obscene (not decent). Men with larger penises are often thought to be more handsome, manly and powerful. A lot of people also believe that men with bigger penises are better at making their partners feel good when they are having sex. However, this is not always true.
Like a man's penis, a woman's clitoris can also become erect. This happens in a similar way to an erection of the penis. The clitoris also has a corpora cavernosa, and when a woman is sexually excited this part of the clitoris fill with blood. This causes the clitoris and other parts of the woman's sex organs to become larger, harder, redder in colour, and very sensitive to being touched.
The nipples of men and women can also become erect. Women's nipples become erect when they are breastfeeding (giving milk to their babies from their breasts). Men and women may also have an erection of their nipples when they are sexually excited, or if they feel cold. Nipples do not have any tissue in them that fills with blood. Instead, the body's nervous system makes muscles in the nipples contract (become shorter), causing them to stand up and become slightly harder.
Blood flows out of the corpus spongiosum and corpora cavernosa penis, and the penis goes back to its normal size. A man who often has problems having or keeping an erection of his penis is said to have erectile dysfunction (ED). On the other hand, an erection that lasts too long is also a dangerous condition called priapism.


== Penis ==

The term erection is most often used to refer to an erection of the penis. A man's penis is usually soft, quite short and hangs down. When the penis is like this, it is said to be flaccid (pronounced FLA-sid). In order for the man to take part in sexual intercourse by putting his penis inside a woman's vagina, his penis needs to become longer, thicker, harder and to stand upright. When this happens, it is said that the penis is erect, or that the man has an erection. The penis needs to be at least mildly erect before the man can have an orgasm and ejaculate semen.
The scientific name for an erection is tumescence (which means "swelling"). Some slang terms for having an erection are getting hard, getting wood and having a hard-on, and an erect penis is informally called a boner, hard-on, stiffy, wood or woody.


=== How it happens ===

The penis is shaped like a banana or sausage. It has a duct or tube called the urethra running right through it. Semen and urine pass along the urethra to get out of the body. Around the whole urethra is tissue called the corpus spongiosum penis (which is Latin for "body of the penis that is like a sponge"). It is near the lower surface of the penis. Also inside the penis near its upper surface are two cylindrical tissues called the corpora cavernosa penis (Latin for "bodies of the penis that are like caves"). (One of these tissues by itself is called a corpus cavernosum.) The corpus spongiosum penis and corpora cavernosa penis are filled with many blood vessels called arteries which carry blood.
When a man is sexually aroused or stimulated (made sexually excited) by touch – for example, if he masturbates or another person touches him in a sexual way – the touching is picked up by nerves in the arteries of the corpus spongiosum penis and corpora cavernosa penis. The nerves then cause a chemical called nitric oxide to be released into the arteries. This makes the arteries dilate (become wider), and they fill up with blood. Thus, the corpus spongiosum penis and corpora cavernosa penis all fill with blood and become larger and harder. This makes the penis grow longer, thicker and harder. The corpora cavernosa penis press against blood vessels called veins that let blood flow out of the penis. Since less blood can flow out of the penis through the veins, more of it stays in the penis, which remains hard. During an erection, a valve stops urine from entering the urethra so that only semen flows along it. This is why it is very difficult for a man to urinate when he is having an erection.
A man can also become sexually aroused without being touched, for example, if he sees a naked person or thinks about having sex with someone. In this case, his brain sends messages through his spinal cord (which is inside his vertebral column or backbone) to his penis and makes an erection happen. The brain can also stop an erection from happening, even if the man is being touched sexually.
After a man has had an orgasm and has ejaculated, his erection usually ends. How long this takes depends on the length and thickness of his penis. A man can also stop having an erection without having an orgasm and ejaculating, if he is no longer sexually aroused. Nerves in his body cause the arteries in the penis to constrict (become narrower). This forces blood out of the corpus spongiosum penis and corpora cavernosa penis. As they go back to their normal size, they do not press so much on the veins leading out of the penis. This lets blood flow faster out of the corpus spongiosum penis and corpora cavernosa penis. The scientific term for this process is detumescence.
thumb|left|These photographs show a penis that is not erect (top left), a partly erect penis (bottom left), and a fully erect penis (right).


=== Shape and size ===
The angle that an erect penis makes varies from one man to another. If it is imagined that a man is standing upright and there is a horizontal line stretching out from the base of his penis, most men's erect penises point upwards from the line at a certain angle (as shown in the photograph on the left). However, it is common and normal for an erect penis to point nearly vertically upwards, nearly vertically downwards, or even horizontally forward. The angle depends on how long a man's suspensory ligament is. The suspensory ligament is a band of tough, stringy tissue that joins a man's penis to the front of his pelvis.
Few men's penises are completely straight when they are erect. It is common for an erect penis to have a slight curve in it. The curve can be up or down, or to the left or right. A curve of up to 30° is considered normal, and medical treatment is usually not needed unless the angle of curvature is more than 45°. A curved penis does not usually cause a man any problems when he is having sex. However, if the curvature of a penis changes, this could be caused by an illness called Peyronie's disease (see below).
A survey of 300 men over the age of 18 carried out between 11 March and 17 March 2001 in Cancún, Mexico, found that among those men the average erect human penis was about 14.928 centimetres (5.877 inches) long, and that most of them had an erect penis length of between 14 and 16 centimetres (5.5 and 6.3 inches). The typical girth or circumference (the length around the outside of the penis) was about 12.63 centimetres (4.972 inches), and most erect penises had a girth of between 12 and 13 centimetres (4.7 and 5.1 inches). As this survey was only done in one city, its findings may not apply to men from other countries.
The size of an erect penis generally does not change after puberty, the time when a boy becomes sexually mature. Some people have surgery to make their penises larger. However, a study that came out in 2006 found that only 35% of men who had gone for such surgery were happy with the results.


=== Unexpected erections ===

An erection of the penis can also happen by itself when a man is asleep, often when he is dreaming. The scientific term for this is nocturnal penile tumescence (which means "swelling of the penis at night"). It is also common for a man to wake up after a night's sleep to find that he has an erection. This is often caused by his bladder being full of urine, which presses on the tissues in the penis. Such an erection is sometimes informally called a morning glory or morning wood.
Unexpected erections are involuntary and are normal. Such erections can be embarrassing if they happen in public. Erections can occur unexpectedly at any time of day.


=== Health problems ===


==== Difficulty having an erection ====
A man who often has problems having or keeping an erection of his penis is said to have erectile dysfunction. Erectile dysfunction is also known as ED, impotence or male impotence. The study of erectile dysfunction comes within andrology, the field of science dealing with men's health.
ED is not uncommon. For example, about 10% of all men in the United Kingdom will have ED happening to them regularly at some time in their lives. It can be due to both physiological and psychological reasons. Physiological reasons are those dealing with how the body works. Psychological reasons are those involving human behaviour and how people think.
These are some common physiological reasons for ED:
Problems with the brain and nerves – diseases affecting the brain, spinal cord and nerves, such as Alzheimer's disease, clinical depression, diabetes mellitus, multiple sclerosis, panic disorders, Parkinson's disease, schizophrenia and stroke.
Circulatory problems – diseases that affect the way blood circulates (moves around) the body, such as hypertension (high blood pressure) and blood vessels becoming blocked. Such diseases can lead to less blood flowing into the penis. Smoking can lead to ED as it causes arteries to become narrower. Research shows that the number of men who have ED among those who smoke is about 85% higher compared to men who do not.
Hormonal problems – diseases affecting the testicles or pituitary gland such as a tumor in the pituitary gland. (A tumor, also spelled tumour, is a bunch of cells growing out of control that can sometimes lead to cancer.) This can cause hypogonadism, which means that there are low levels of testosterone in the body. Testosterone is a hormone (chemical made by the body) that is important in libido (wanting to have sex).
Problems with the corpora cavernosa penis – for example, Peyronie's disease (pronounced PAY-rə-neez). When a man with this disease has an erection, his penis is very curved. The curvature is caused by scar tissue growing inside the penis. Peyronie's disease can make having an erection painful and lead to ED.
Problems caused by medical treatment and surgery – the nerves and blood vessels involved in erection can be damaged by some types of medical treatment such as using radiation to kill cancer cells; and surgery of the bladder, colon (large intestine), prostate or rectum. For instance, if men have prostate and bladder cancer surgery they are more likely to suffer from ED because nerves and other tissue around tumors usually need to be taken out together with the tumors. Some drugs (medicines) may also cause ED. One such drug is lithium, which is made of chemicals called lithium salts. Lithium is given to people who suffer from bipolar disorder, a kind of mental illness. People who have bipolar disorder suffer from mood swings – they sometimes feel very happy and friendly, then become angry or very sad. Lithium helps to reduce the number of mood swings. However, it also seems to lower the amount of nitric oxide in the blood vessels of the corpora cavernosa.
Lifestyle and growing older – ED is more common in people who take too much alcohol and illegal drugs, people who are obese (fat in an unhealthy way), and older people.
ED can also happen for psychological reasons. For example, a man can find it difficult to have an erection:
if thinking about having sex with someone makes him feel anxious or nervous, because he is worried that his sexual partner will think he is not sexy or not good at sexual intercourse;
if there are problems in his relationship with his partner, such as having arguments, no longer being in love, or facing a divorce;
if he is feeling a lot of stress due to his job, or big changes in his life like the death of someone close to him; or
if he is not sure about his gender identity (though he is a man he may feel like a woman) or his sexual identity – whether he is heterosexual (straight) or homosexual (gay).
Having erections is seen by many people as a very important part of being a man. Therefore, a man who has ED often feels that he is not manly enough and not successful in life. This can lead to him feeling ashamed and not as good as other men. The matter is made worse because men often do not like talking about their personal problems with other people, so they keep their unhappy feelings to themselves. However, talking to a doctor or psychiatrist (a doctor who knows a lot about mental problems) is helpful, as he or she may be able to suggest ways of dealing with the problem.
How ED may be treated depends on the cause. If it is caused by a disease, sometimes treating the disease will reduce the problem. For example, if a man is unable to have erections because his body does not make enough testosterone, he can be given pills to take which help his body to do so. If the blood vessels or nerves in the corpora cavernosa penis are damaged, a full cure may not be possible. However, there are some temporary treatments that allow a man to have an erection for long enough to have sex:
Medicines – Medicines in the form of pills that are swallowed such as sildenafil (which is sold as Viagra), tadalafil (Cialis) and vardenafil (Levitra) make the arteries in the corpora cavernosa penis relax, which allows more blood into the penis. There are also other medicines in cream or liquid form that are put into the opening at the tip of the penis, rubbed on the outside of the penis, or injected into the penis using a syringe (a medical tool with a needle at one end that is poked into the body). An example of such a medicine is alprostadil, which also works by making the arteries in the penis become wider.
Vacuum pumps – If medicines do not work, a vacuum pump can sometimes help. This device is made up of a plastic cylinder that fits over the penis, which is joined to a pump. The pump can be electrical or worked by hand. When the pump is used, it draws air out of the space around the penis. This causes more blood to flow into the penis, making an erection happen. Once the penis is erect, the device is taken off. To slow down the flow of blood out of the penis, a tight ring is worn around the base of the penis.
Surgical implants – If other treatments do not work, a last method may be for the impotent man to go for surgery and have a penile implant put into his penis. Modern implants are made up of cylinders that are put inside the corpora cavernosa penis. The cylinders are connected by tubes to a pump that is put under the skin near the testicles. When the pump is used, it pushes fluid into the cylinders, which become hard and cause an erection. After the man has finished having sex, he can press a valve that allows the fluid to flow out from the cylinders.
Counselling – If a man's ED is caused by a psychological problem, counselling can often help. This means talking to a psychiatrist to try and understand what is making the man feel anxious or worried and to find ways of dealing with the matter. Even if the ED is not caused by a mental problem but some disease, talking to a psychiatrist can also be useful if the man is very worried.


==== Erection lasting too long ====
If a man's erection lasts for more than four hours even though he is no longer sexually excited, this is a medical problem called priapism (pronounced PRYE-ə-pi-z(ə)m). The condition is named after the Greek god Priapus, whose penis was believed to always be erect (see below). Priapism is painful, and is a medical emergency because the blood stuck in the penis can become thick and form clots. This can damage the blood vessels of the penis and lead to erectile dysfunction (ED). In serious cases the tissues of the penis can die, and the penis may have to be amputated (cut off) so that the tissue death does not spread to the rest of the body.
It is not really known what causes priapism. Men who suffer from priapism sometimes have blood diseases like leukemia (a type of cancer of the blood; in the United Kingdom and some other countries it is spelled leukaemia) or sickle-cell disease (which makes the blood cells crescent-shaped). Problems with the nervous system such as injury to the spinal cord or abnormal growths on it can also lead to priapism. Certain medicines can make priapism happen, including some used to treat ED such as alprostadil. A 2008 study suggests that too much of the chemical adenosine in the body may cause priapism since it makes blood vessels widen which lets more blood flow into the penis.
When a man with priapism is brought to the emergency department of a hospital, a doctor will usually try to remove blood from the corpora cavernosa penis by aspirating it (sucking it out) using a syringe. If this is not enough, a chemical called phenylephrine may be injected into the penis to try and make the blood vessels become narrower. If this also does not work, the doctor will make a shunt (a hole or passage) between the corpora cavernosa penis and corpus spongiosum penis. This allows blood to flow away from the corpora cavernosa penis into the corpus spongiosum penis. For men who have priapism again and again, it has been found that medicines such as sildenafil (Viagra) and tadalafil (Cialis) may help.


=== Culture ===


==== Symbol of sex and fertility ====
When an erect penis is shown in art, it is often called a phallus. Erotic (sexually exciting) art has shown phalluses for a very long time. Pictures of men with erections appear on ancient objects and in paintings.
The erect penis was also a symbol or sign of health and fertility (the ability to give life). The Hohle Fels phallus was found in a cave in Germany. It is a piece of stone carved to look like a penis that archaeologists believe is about 28,000 years old. (Archaeologists are scientists who study the past by looking for things that people have left behind.) From the fourth millennium B.C. (4000–3001 B.C.), Ancient Egyptians worshipped Min as the god of reproduction and the maker of all things. Min was shown in statues and on wall carvings as having an erect penis.
The Ancient Greeks believed in a god called Priapus who had a very large penis that was always erect. He was thought to protect livestock (animals kept by humans for food, milk, leather or wool), fruit plants and gardens, and men's sex organs. He was also seen as able to chase away evil, and as a protector of sailors, fishermen and others needing good luck.

Long after the Roman Empire ended and many people became Christian, Priapus was still seen as a symbol of health and fertility. A 13th-century book called the Lanercost Chronicle, which is a history of northern England and Scotland, talks about someone putting up a statue of Priapus to try and stop a disease from spreading among cattle.
Some Native Americans in the Southwestern United States believe in a fertility god called Kokopelli who is in charge of childbirth and agriculture (the growing of plants and animals for food and other uses). He also plays tricks and is a symbol for the spirit of music. Kokopelli is sometimes shown as a man playing a flute with a humpback (a back that is bent forwards), things like feathers sticking out from his head, and a very big penis.


==== Modern views ====
Today, phalluses do not often appear in artworks or movies (except in pornographic movies which show people having sex with each other). This is because many people think that showing a man's penis when it is erect is obscene (not decent).
Men with larger penises are commonly thought to be more handsome, manly and powerful. In 2006, it was reported that an Internet survey of 52,031 heterosexual (straight) men and women showed that men who thought that their penises were larger than the average size believed they were more good-looking. Of the men, 55% of them were happy with their penis size, but 45% wanted to be larger. Only 0.2% wanted a smaller penis. On the other hand, 85% of women were happy with how big their partner's penis was. Another study that also came out in 2006 in the Netherlands found that out of 251 homosexual (gay) men who were asked, most felt it was better to have a large penis, and those who thought they had one were happy about their bodies. However, just because a man has a large penis does not always mean he is sexier or stronger than other men, even though many people think this.
A lot of people also believe that men with bigger penises are better at making their partners feel good when they are having sex. For heterosexual men, this is because it is thought that when the penis can go further into the vagina, this helps the woman have a better orgasm. Scientists are not sure whether this is true or not. Some research shows that the most sensitive area of the female sex organs includes the vulva, clitoris and the part of the vagina nearest the outside of a woman's body. There are also parts of the clitoris inside the vulva and vagina. Therefore, most men's penises are long enough to make their partners feel good during sex. Also, some studies say it is not how long but how thick a penis is that decides how well it excites a woman sexually.
However, other research seems to say that a long penis that touches and sexually excites the fornix, which is the deepest part of the vagina near the cervix (the opening of the uterus into the vagina), helps a woman to have an orgasm. A study from the Netherlands of 375 women came out in 2002. This study said that although 77% of the women felt that the length of a man's penis was not important to them, quite a large number – 21% – felt it was important.


== Clitoris ==

The clitoris (pronounced KLI-tə-ris) is part of a woman's sex organs. It makes a woman's orgasms happen, which gives her very good sexual feelings. Like a man's penis, a woman's clitoris also becomes bigger and harder, moving out and away from the body, when she is sexually excited. However, because the clitoris is much smaller than the penis, and most of the clitoris is inside the woman's body, only part of its entire length can be seen from the outside. Some clitoral erections cannot be seen as well as an erection of the penis.
An erection of the clitoris happens in the same way as an erection of the penis. The clitoris has a corpus cavernosum similar to the penis. However, instead of the corpus spongiosum it has two vestibular bulbs. When a woman is sexually excited, the corpus cavernosum and vestibular bulbs fill with blood. This causes the clitoris and other parts of the woman's sex organs to become larger, harder, and redder in colour. When this happens, they become very sensitive to being touched.
If an erection of the clitoris does not go away after a long time, even though the woman is not being made sexually excited any more, this is a medical problem called clitorism. Like priapism which can affect a man's penis, it is painful. A woman who thinks she may have clitorism should see a doctor.
Clitorises range in size. From a small pea to fingertip-section(s) when still soft. They engorge with blood and become much larger in all dimensions, and firmer when aroused. They can range into even 4-5 inches in some. A penis has a tubular shape while a clitoris has a hood covering and C curvature shape, and yet still tubelike, and rides along the body. The tip can lift upward more when aroused. The tip can also be referred to as the pearl. Sometimes, it can be uncomfortable to the entire clitoris, from its sensitivity, if treated rashly, mistaking erection for pleasure. This is known mentally by the participant if pleasurable or uncomfortable. It can be hard, or midfirm as well, and climb to a shudder, then do a sharp firm up and an outward move right before, and then a tingling jingle inside and to the g-spot on in the other - and this is an orgasm. Orgasms vary in intensity. The body and mind can be relaxed and passionate afterwards to continue with love making or setting itself.


== Nipples ==

The nipples of men and women can also become erect. Women's nipples become erect when they are breastfeeding (giving milk to their babies from their breasts). Men and women may also have an erection of their nipples when they are sexually excited. This is caused by the release of a hormone called oxytocin in the body. Nipples can also become erect when a person feels cold or sexually excited.
Unlike the penis and clitoris, nipples do not have any tissue in them that fills with blood. Instead, the body's nervous system makes muscles in the nipples contract (become shorter), causing them to stand up and become slightly harder.


== Notes ==Erythema ab igne is a rash of the skin, which is usually caused by the long-term exposure to heat or infrared radiation, and which is not a burn. Usually the name is abbreviated EAI. Other names include hot water bottle rash fire stains, laptop thigh, granny's tartan and toasted skin syndrome.
Some people may complain of mild itchiness and a burning sensation. When a change in skin pigmentation can not be seen, it is often not noticed at all.


== References ==Esophageal cancer (or oesophageal cancer) is a type of cancer which is found in the esophagus. There are many types, mostly squamous cell cancer (about 90–95% of all esophageal cancer worldwide) and adenocarcinoma (about 50–80% of all esophageal cancer in the United States).
Squamous cell cancer rises from the cells that line the upper part of the esophagus. Adenocarcinoma rises from glandular cells that are present at the lining of the esophagus and stomach.


== References ==Ocular oncology is the branch of medicine dealing with tumors relating to the eye and its adnexa. Eye cancer can affect all parts of the eye.
Eye cancers might start in the eye and it can metastatic cancer (spread to the eye from another organ). The two most common cancers that spread to the eye from another organ are breast cancer and lung cancer. Other less common sites of origin include the prostate, kidney, thyroid, skin, colon and blood or bone marrow.
This cancer is most common in children. There is a 95% of finding a cure for this cancer.


== References ==The fallopian tubes (also known as oviducts and uterine tubes) connect the ovaries to the uterus, and let the ovum pass into the uterus where they are able to be fertilized by sperm during sexual intercourse or other ways, such as artificial insemination. There are two Fallopian tubes attached to either side of the uterus.


== Origin ==
They are named after the 16th century Italian anatomist, Gabriele Falloppio. The Greek word salpinx (σαλπιγξ) means "trumpet".


== Anatomy ==
There are two Fallopian tubes attached to either side of the end of the uterus. Each tube will end near one ovary. This place is called the fimbria. The Fallopian tubes are not attached to the ovaries, but open into the peritoneal cavity.
In humans, the Fallopian tubes are about 7 - 14 cm long.


=== Parts ===
There are four parts of the fallopian tube from the ovary to the uterus:
The fimbria
Infundibulum
Ampulla - where the ovum is fertilized
Isthmus


=== Layers ===

The fallopian tube is made of three layers:
Mucosa - these are folded walls with ciliated cells along them.
Muscularis externa
Serosa


=== Movement ===
The Fallopian tubes can move around the pelvis.


== Fertilization ==

When an ovum is ready to be released from the ovary, the ovary wall breaks open and the ovum goes into the fallopian tube. There, it starts moving towards to uterus with the help of liquids and cilia on the inside walls. This can take hours or days.
If the ovum is fertilized while in the fallopian tube, then it sticks to the endometrium, which is the beginning of pregnancy.


== Related pages ==
Menstrual cycle


== References ==Fanconi anemia (FA) is a rare genetic disorder. It is a kind of anemia. People suffering from the disease produce a smaller amount of red and white blood cells. It is named after Guido Fanconi who first described the disease, in 1929. It should not be confused with Fanconi syndrome. Fanconi syndrome is a disorder affecting the kidneys.


== Other websites ==
Fanconi Anemia Research Fund
GeneReviews/NCBI/NIH/UW entry on Fanconi Anemia
OMIM entries on Fanconi Anemia
Fanconi anemia at the Open Directory ProjectThe forearm is the part of the human arm between the elbow and the wrist.The foreskin is a fold of skin that covers the glans penis when the penis is uncircumcised. Most mammals have foreskin.


== Human foreskin ==
The outside of the foreskin is like normal skin but the inside of the foreskin is a membrane like the inside of an eyelid or mouth. The foreskin is attached to the penis by the frenulum, but it can move. Muscles made it very stretchy. The five most sensitive areas of the penis are on the foreskin.


== Use ==
The World Health Organization say that there are lots of uses for the foreskin, such as keeping the glans penis moist, protecting it or to make sexual intercourse feel nicer since it has so many nerves in it. The removal of the foreskin, the circumcision, reduces diseases.
However, Moses and Bailey (1998), say that "it has not been demonstrated that [the foreskin] is associated with increased male sexual pleasure."


== Circumcision ==

Circumcision is when the foreskin is cut off. It is done to satisfy medical, religious and aesthetic views. Circumcision reduces disease, though most medical associations agree the benefits are small (see Circumcision#Policies of various national medical associations). The foreskin can also be pierced or slit for fashion reasons.


== Related pages ==
Anatomy
Circumcision
Genitals
Masturbation
Penis


== References ==


== Other websites ==
Foreskin.org - Many pictures of human foreskinFragile X syndrome (FXS) is a genetic syndrome that causes a range of intellectual disabilities as well as unusual physical and behavioural characteristics. It is one of the most common causes of autism and mental retardation among boys. Basically, these individuals lack an important gene product.


== Technical account ==
Fragile X syndrome occurs as a result of a mutation of the FMR1 gene on the X chromosome. This causes an increase an increase in the number of CGG repeats in the 5' untranslated region of FMR1.
In unaffected individuals, the FMR1 gene contains 5–44 repeats of the CGG codon, most commonly 29 or 30 repeats. Between 45 and 54 repeats is considered a "grey zone". Between 55 and 200 repeats in length is described as a premutation allele. Individuals with fragile X syndrome have a full mutation of the FMR1 allele, with over 200 repeats of the CGG codon.
In these individuals with a repeat expansion greater than 200, there is methylation of the CGG repeat expansion and FMR1 promoter. This silences the FMR1 gene, and its end-product is not made.


== References ==The frontal bone or os frontis is a bone in the front of the human skull. The biggest part of the frontal bone is under the forehead. The name comes from the Latin word frons (meaning "forehead"). The bone looks like a cockleshell in form. It has three parts.


== References ==The frontal lobe is an area in the brain of humans and other mammals, at the front of each cerebral hemisphere. It is in front of the parietal lobe and above and in front of the temporal lobes.
The frontal lobes takes action based on sensory information (sight, sound, touch) from the three rear areas of the cerebrum. The action is moderated by the influence of the pre-frontal cortex. The system is a delicate balance between the need to satisfy urges from the most ancient parts of the brain, such as hunger, self-defence and sex, with the need to act in a way which is socially acceptable.
The precentral gyrus, forming the back of the frontal lobe, contains the primary motor cortex. This controls voluntary movements of specific body parts.


== Evolution ==
For many years, many scientists thought that the frontal lobe was comparatively larger in humans than in other primates. They thought that this was an important feature of human evolution and was the main reason why human cognition is different from that of the other primates.
However, this view has been challenged by later research. Magnetic resonance imaging was used to find the volume of the frontal cortex in humans, all living ape species and several monkey species. The human frontal cortex is not relatively larger than the cortex in the other great apes, but it is relatively larger than the frontal cortex in the lesser apes and the monkeys.


== References ==Frostbite is the localized medical condition where very cold temperatures damage skin and other tissue. It is most likely to happen in body parts farthest from the heart and in body parts with large exposed areas. It most often occurs in toes.
Also, if the affected parts are not amputated, the person is likely to suffer from a disease called gangrene.


== References ==A fugue state (dissociative fugue or psychogenic fugue) is a rare psychiatric disorder. It involves temporary loss of memory (amnesia). It usually only lasts a short time (from hours to days), but can last months or longer. In a fugue state, the person not only forgets all about who they are, but may suddenly adopt a new identity. They may leave home and wander, settle in another area with a new name. Fugue occurs to avoid stress and anxiety. After the fugue state comes to an end, the person recovers the memories they lost, but usually forgets all that happened during the fugue.


== References ==


== Other websites ==
"Dissociative Fugue" from the Mental Health Matters website.
"Dissociative Fugue" from the Merck & Co. website.Gallbladder cancer is a rare type of cancer which forms in the gallbladder. It is most common in central and South America, central and eastern Europe, China, Japan and northern India. It is also common in certain ethnic groups e.g. Native Americans, Indians and Hispanics.
If it is diagnosed early enough, it can be cured by removing the gallbladder, part of the liver and lymph nodes. Most often it is found after symptoms such as abdominal pain, jaundice and vomiting occur, and it has spread to other organs such as the liver.


== References ==Gangrene is a serious medical condition that causes the decay and death of body tissue, usually in the extremities such as the fingers, hands, toes, and feet. The two main types of gangrene are dry gangrene and wet gangrene. A third less common type is a form of wet gangrene known as gas gangrene. A very rare type which affects the internal organs is known as internal gangrene.
Dry gangrene is usually caused by a loss of blood supply to the affected area, such as may happen following an injury which damages the blood vessels to the affected area. Wet gangrene usually occurs when a wound becomes infected with various types of bacteria. Gas gangrene is usually caused by clostridium bacteria and mainly affects the muscles. Internal gangrene affects the internal organs, usually the intestines, gallbladder, or appendix.
There are a number of risk factors which increase a person's chances of getting gangrene. These includes advanced blockage of the arteries in medical conditions such as diabetes.Gastritis is an inflammation of the lining of the stomach. It has many possible causes. The main causes are drinking too much alcohol, or using nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (also known as NSAIDs) such as aspirin or ibuprofen for too long. Sometimes gastritis starts after major surgery, serious injury, burns, or infections. People who have had weight loss surgery may also get gastritis. Long term causes are infection with bacteria, mainly Helicobacter pylori. Certain diseases, such as pernicious anemia, chronic bile reflux, stress and certain autoimmune disorders can cause gastritis as well. The most common symptom is abdominal pain. Other symptoms are indigestion, abdominal bloating, nausea, and vomiting. Some may have a feeling of fullness or burning in the upper abdomen. A gastroscopy, blood test, complete blood count test, or a faeces test may be used to diagnose gastritis. Treatment includes taking antacids or other medicines, such as proton pump inhibitors or antibiotics, and avoiding hot or spicy foods. For those with pernicious anemia, B12 injections are given.


== References ==The glans penis (or just glans) is the sensitive tip of the penis. It is also called the "head" of the penis. Slang names include "helmet" and "bell end". When the penis is not circumcised or erect, it is covered by the foreskin.


== Diseases ==

The opening of the urethra is at the tip of the glans. In children who have been circumcised and wear diapers, the opening of the penis has no protection. This can cause the urethra to get very narrow which can need surgery to reopen later.
The epithelium of the glans penis is moist and washing it too much can dry the mucous membrane that covers the glans penis and cause dermatitis.


== Anatomy ==

The glans penis is a cap around the corpus spongiosum. It is attached to the Corpus cavernosum penis and at the tip of the glans is the urethra opening. The foreskin helps keeps the glans moist.


== Related pages ==
Corpus cavernosum
Foreskin
Penis
Clitoris
Frenulum
Circumcision


== References ==


== Other websites ==
SUNY Labs 42:07-0102 - "The Male Perineum and the Penis: The Corpus Spongiosum and Corpora Cavernosa"
SUNY Labs 44:06-0101 - "The Male Pelvis: The Urethra"Gout is a very painful medical condition. It is a red, tender, hot, swollen joint. The attacks happen most often in the joint at the base of the big toe. It is caused by crystals getting deposited from the blood. This happens when the level of uric acid in the blood is too high. The crystals then stay in joints, tendons, and surrounding tissues.
Inflammatory arthritis happens in about 50% of all cases of gout. The disease may also appear as kidney disease due to urate crystals. People with gout often have more than one attack of gout.
Doctors decide a patient has gout if they find crystals in the joint fluid. Treatment with anti-inflammatory drugs, steroids, or colchicine improves symptoms. Once an attack goes away, the patient can change his or her lifestyle to reduce levels of uric acid. People who have gout attacks often may take allopurinol or probenecid to prevent symptoms later.
Gout has become more common. It affects approximately one to two percent of people in the West during their lives. Risk factors have been increasing and may be causing the increase in gout. Metabolic syndrome, longer life expectancy, and changes in diet are the most common risk factors. Gout was historically known as “the disease of kings” or “the disease of rich men".


== Signs and symptoms ==

Gout can present in a number of ways, although the most common is a recurrent attack of intense inflammatory arthritis (a red, tender, hot, swollen joint). Joint pain usually begins over 2–4 hours and during the night. Symptoms occur at night because of the lower body temperature at this time.
High levels of uric acid in the blood over a long period of time (hyperuricemia) may cause other symptoms such as hard, painless deposits of uric acid crystals known as tophi. Extensive tophi may lead to chronic arthritis due to bone erosion. High levels of uric acid in the blood may also cause crystals to form in the kidneys. This causes stone formation followed by urate nephropathy.


== Cause ==
A very high, abnormal level of uric acid in the blood (hyperuricemia) is the basic cause of gout. Diet and a person's genes are two of several possible causes of the high levels. Levels can also become high if the body cannot excrete enough urate, the salts of uric acid.


=== Lifestyle ===
The kinds and amounts of foods people eat cause about 12% of gout. Drinking alcohol or fructose-sweetened drinks, and eating meat and seafood can cause this disease. Injuries and surgery may also start an attack of gout. Recent studies showed that some beliefs about connections between diet and gout were not true. Eating purine-rich vegetables (e.g., beans, peas, lentils, and spinach) large amounts of protein do not contribute to developing gout. Coffee, vitamin C, and dairy products, as well as physical fitness appear to decrease the risk. These things reduce insulin resistance and may reduce cases of gout.


=== Inherited causes ===
Inherited factors are about 60% responsible for the variability in uric acid level. Two genes called SLC2A9 and ABCG2 are commonly associated with gout. Variations in these genes can almost double the risk of developing this disease.


=== Medical conditions ===
Gout often happens with other medical problems. Metabolic syndrome happens along with nearly 75% of all cases of gout. Gout often makes these other problems worse or harder to treat: polycythemia, lead poisoning, renal failure, hemolytic anemia, psoriasis, and solid organ transplants. Males have three times the chance of getting gout when the body mass index is greater than or equal to 35. Frequent lead exposure and lead-contaminated alcohol are risk factors for gout because lead harms the kidney function.


== Changes in the body ==

Gout is a disorder of purine metabolism, and occurs when its final metabolite, uric acid, crystallizes in the form of monosodium urate. The blood deposits the crystals in joints, on tendons, and in the surrounding tissues. These crystals then trigger a localimmune system inflammatory reaction. Uricase is required to breakdown uric acid. An evolutionary loss of uricase in humans and higher primates has made this condition so common.
The triggers that cause uric acid to build up in the blood are not well understood. While it may crystallize at normal levels, it is more likely to do so as uric acid levels increase. Other factors believed to be important in triggering an acute episode of arthritis include cool temperatures, rapid changes in uric acid levels, acidosis, articular hydration, and extracellular matrixproteins, such as proteoglycans, collagens, and chondroitin sulfate. The increased critilization at low temperatures partly explains why the joints in the feet are most commonly affected. Rapid changes in uric acid may occur due to a number of factors, including trauma, surgery, chemotherapy, diuretics, and stopping or starting the medication allopurinol.


== Diagnosis ==

Gout may be diagnosed and treated without further investigations in someone with hyperuricemia and the classic podagra. If there is any doubt about the diagnosis, synovial fluid analysis should be done. X-rays are useful for identifying chronic gout only. X-rays are not useful for treating acute gout attacks.


=== Synovial fluid ===
A definitive diagnosis of gout is based upon the identification of monosodium urate (MSU) crystals in joint fluid or a tophus. All synovial fluid samples obtained from undiagnosed, inflamed joints should be examined for these crystals. Under polarized light microscopy, the crystals have a needle-like shape and strong negative birefringence. This test is difficult to perform, and often requires a trained technician. The fluid must also be examined relatively quickly after aspiration, as temperature and pH affect their solubility.


=== Blood tests ===
Hyperuricemia is a classic feature of gout. Gout occurs nearly half of the time without hyperuricemia and most people with raised uric acid levels never develop gout. The usefulness of measuring uric acid levels is limited. Hyperuricemia is defined as a plasma urate level greater than 420 μmol/L (7.0 mg/dL) in males and 360 μmol/L (6.0 mg/dL) in females. Other blood tests commonly performed are white blood cell count, electrolytes, renal function, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate(ESR). Both the white blood cells and ESR may be elevated due to gout in the absence of infection. A white blood cell count as high as 40.0×109/L (40,000/mm3) has been documented in people with gout.


=== Differential diagnosis ===
The most important diagnosis to rule out in gout is septic arthritis (an infection in the joint). This should be considered in those with signs of infection or those who do not improve with treatment. A joint fluid Gram stainand culture may be performed to support the diagnosis. Other conditions which present similarly include pseudogout and rheumatoid arthritis. Gouty tophi, especially when not in a joint, can be mistaken for basal cell carcinoma, or other cancers.


== Prevention ==
Both lifestyle changes and medications can decrease uric acid levels. Dietary and lifestyle choices that are effective include reducing intake of food such as meat and seafood, eating adequate vitamin C, limiting alcohol and fructose consumption, and avoiding obesity. A low-calorie diet in obese men decreased uric acid levels by 100 µmol/L (1.7 mg/dL) on average. Vitamin C intake of 1,500 mg per day decreases the risk of gout by 45%. Coffee, but not tea, consumption is associated with a lower risk of gout. Gout may be secondary to sleep apnea through the release of purines from oxygen-starved cells. Treatment of sleep apnea can lessen the occurrence of gout attacks.


== Treatment ==
The first goal of treating gout is to reduce the symptoms of an acute attack. Repeated attacks can be prevented by using different drugs that reduce the uric acid levels in the blood. Ice applied for 20 to 30 minutes several times a day decreases pain. Options for immediate treatment include nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), colchicine and steroids. Options for prevention include allopurinol, febuxostat and probenecid. Lowering uric acid levels can cure the disease. Treatment of comorbidities is also important.


=== NSAIDs ===
NSAIDs are the most common treatment for gout. No specific type of NSAID is significantly more or less effective than any other. Improvement may be seen within 4 hours. Treatment is recommended for 1–2 weeks. NSAIDs are not recommended for people with certain other health problems such as bleeding from the stomach, esophagus or intestines, renal failure, or heart failure. While indomethacin has historically been the most commonly used NSAID, ibuprofen may be preferred due to its lack of side effects. A proton pump inhibitor may be given to people at risk of experiencing gastric side effects.


=== Colchicine ===
Colchicine is an alternative treatment for people that are unable to tolerate NSAIDs. Its side effects, primarily gastrointestinal upset limit its use. The occurrence of gastrointestinal upset depends on the dose. The risk of experiencing this side effect can be reduced by using smaller, yet still effective doses. Colchicine may interact with other commonly prescribed drugs such as atorvastatin and erythromycin.


=== Steroids ===
Glucocorticoids (otherwise known as steroids) have been found to be as effective as NSAIDs for treating gout. Glucocorticoids may be used if it is not possible to use NSAIDs. Using glucocorticoids also lead to improvement when it is injected into the joint. A joint infection must be excluded if the condition worsens.


=== Pegloticase ===
Pegloticase (Krystexxa) was approved in the USA to treat gout in 2010. It will be a treatment option for the 3% of people who are intolerant to other medications. Pegloticase is administered as an intravenous infusion every two weeks and has been found to reduce uric acid levels in this population.


=== Prophylaxis ===
A number of medications are useful for preventing further episodes of gout, including xanthine oxidase inhibitor (including allopurinol and febuxostat), and uricosurics (including probenecid and sulfinpyrazone). They are not usually given until one to two weeks after an acute attack has resolved due to concerns that it may worsen attack symptoms. These medications are often used in combination with either an NSAID or colchicine for the first 3–6 months. This treatment is not recommended until a person has suffered two gout attacks, unless destructive joint changes, tophi, or urate nephropathy exist. This type of treatment is delayed until this point because is not cost effective to offer this treatment sooner. Urate-lowering measures should be increased until serum uric acid levels are below 300–360 µmol/L (5.0-6.0 mg/dL). This treatment should be continued forever. These medications should be continued even if the person experiences a gout attack while on the medication.
Uricosuric drugs are preferred for treating gout if there is not enough uric acid in the urine defined by a 24-hour collection of urine with less than 800 mg of uric acid. Uricosuric drugs are not recommended if the person has a history of renal stones. A 24-hour urine excretion of more than 800 mg indicates overproduction and xanthine oxidase inhibitors are the preferred drugs for providing treatment. Note that probenecid appears to be less effective than allopurinol.
Xanthine oxidase inhibitors (including allopurinol and febuxostat) block uric acid production. Long term therapy is safe and well tolerated, and can be used in people with reduced renal function or urate stones. Allopurinol has caused hypersensitivity in a small number of individuals. In such cases, the alternative drug febuxostat has been recommended.


== Outcomes ==
Without treatment, an acute attack of gout will usually resolve in 5 to 7 days. 60% of people will have a second attack within one year. Those with gout are at increased risk of hypertension, diabetes mellitus, metabolic syndrome, and renal and cardiovascular disease and at increased risk of death. This may be partly due to its association with insulin resistance and obesity, but some of the increased risk appears to be simply due to having gout.
Without treatment, acute gout attacks may develop into chronic gout with destruction of joint surfaces, joint deformity, and painless tophi. These tophi occur in 30% of those who are untreated for five years, often in the outer part of the ear, over the outer part of the elbow, or on the Achilles tendons. With aggressive treatment, they may dissolve. Kidney stones also frequently complicate gout, affecting between 10 and 40% of people. Kidney stones occur due to low urine pH promoting the crystallization of uric acid. Other forms of chronic renal dysfunction may occur.


== Epidemiology ==
Gout affects around 1–2% of the Western population at some point in their lives and it is becoming more common. Rates of gout have approximately doubled between 1990 and 2010. This rise is believed to be due to increasing life expectancy, changes in diet, and an increase in diseases associated with gout, such as metabolic syndrome and high blood pressure. A number of factors have been found to influence rates of gout, including age, race, and the season of the year. In men over the age of 30 and women over the age of 50, prevalence is 2%.
In the United States, gout is twice as likely to occur in African American males as it is in European Americans. Rates are high among the peoples of the Pacific Islands and the Māori of New Zealand, but rare in Australian aborigines, despite a higher average concentration of serum uric acid in the aboriginal group. Gout has become common in China, Polynesia, and urban sub-Saharan Africa. Some studies have found that gout attacks occur more frequently in the spring. This has been attributed to seasonal changes in diet, alcohol consumption, physical activity, and temperature.


== History ==

The word gout was initially used by Randolphus of Bocking, around 1200 a.d. It is derived from the Latin word gutta, meaning "a drop" (of liquid). According to the Oxford English Dictionary, this is derived from humorism and "the notion of the 'dropping' of a morbid material from the blood in and around the joints".
People have been aware of gout since ancient times. Historically, it has been referred to as "the king of diseases and the disease of kings" or "the disease of rich men". The first documentation of the disease is from Egypt in 2,600 b.c. in a description of arthritis of the largest toe. The Greek physician Hippocrates around 400 b.c. commented on it in his Aphorisms and noted its absence in eunuchs (men who have had there testicles removed at a young age) and women before menopause. Aulus Cornelius Celsus (30 a.d.) described the linkage with alcohol, later onset in women, and associated kidney problems:

Again thick urine, the sediment from which is white, indicates that pain and disease are to be apprehended in the region of joints or viscera... Joint troubles in the hands and feet are very frequent and persistent, such as occur in cases of podagra and cheiragra. These seldom attack eunuchs or boys before coition with a woman, or women except those in whom the menses have become suppressed... some have obtained lifelong security by refraining from wine, mead and venery.

In 1683, Thomas Sydenham, an English physician, described its occurrence in the early hours of the morning, and its more frequent occurrence in older males:

Gouty patients are, generally, either old men, or men who have so worn themselves out in youth as to have brought on a premature old age - of such dissolute habits none being more common than the premature and excessive indulgence in venery, and the like exhausting passions. The victim goes to bed and sleeps in good health. About two o'clock in the morning he is awakened by a severe pain in the great toe; more rarely in the heel, ankle or instep. The pain is like that of a dislocation, and yet parts feel as if cold water were poured over them. Then follows chills and shivers, and a little fever... The night is passed in torture, sleeplessness, turning the part affected, and perpetual change of posture; the tossing about of body being as incessant as the pain of the tortured joint, and being worse as the fit comes on.

The Dutch scientist, Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, first described the microscopic appearance of urate crystals in 1679. In 1848, English physician Alfred Baring Garrod realized that this excess uric acid in the blood was the cause of gout.


== In other animals ==
Gout is rare in most other animals due to their ability to produce uricase, which breaks down uric acid. Humans and other great apes don't have this ability, which makes gout common. The Tyrannosaurus rex specimen known as "Sue", however, is believed to have suffered from gout.


== Research ==
A number of new medications are under study for treating gout, including anakinra, canakinumab, and rilonacept. A man made uricase enzyme (rasburicase) is also available. Its use is limited because it triggers an autoimmune response. Versions of this medication that are less prone to cause allergies are in development.


== References ==A Hallux valgus, also called bunion, is when the bone or tissue around the joint at the base of the big toe becomes larger. The big toe (hallux) may turn in toward the second toe, and the tissues around it can become swollen and red.Hammer toes are a condition of the proximal interphalangeal joint of the second, third, fourth or fifth toe. The condition makes the toe permanently bent, and resembles a hammer. The mallet toe is a very similar issue which affects the distal joint area. Some people are born with these issues. Usually, these issues happen due to the wear of poorly fitting shoes that often force the toe to bend (particularly high heels) or shoes which are too narrow or short.


== Other websites ==
 Media related to Hammer toes at Wikimedia CommonsHead and neck cancer or throat cancer is a type of cancer which either beings in the lip, oral cavity (mouth), nasal cavity (inside the nose), paranasal sinuses, pharynx, and larynx. 90% of head and neck cancers are squamous cell carcinomas (SCCHN), originating from the mucosal lining (epithelium) of these regions. This cancer can be caused by drinking too much alcohol or chewing tobacco.


== References ==Heart cancer is cancer that involves different regions of the heart. It is extremely rare. Many types of the disease includes myxomas, fibromas, rhabdomyomas, and hamartomas.
In a study of 12,487 autopsies performed in Hong Kong seven cardiac tumors were found, most of which were benign. According to Mayo Clinic: "At Mayo Clinic, on average only one case of heart cancer is seen each year."


== References ==Hepatitis C is an infection that mostly affects the liver. The hepatitis C virus (HCV) causes this disease. Often, a person with Hepatitis C does not have any symptoms (health problems or signs that he has the disease). However, chronic infection can scar the liver. Many years of infection may cause cirrhosis. Sometimes, people with cirrhosis also have liver failure or liver cancer. They can also have very swollen veins of the esophagus and stomach. The blood loss from this problem can kill.
Hepatitis C is usually spread by blood-to-blood contact (when blood from a person with Hepatitis C contacts (touches or gets into) another person's bloodstream). The most common ways that this happens are through intravenous drug use (when a person shoots drugs into one of their veins, with a needle that was already used by a person infected with Hepatitis C); nonsterile medical equipment (medical tools that were not cleaned well enough after being used on an infected person); and blood transfusions (when a person is given blood that came from an infected person).
Around the world, about 130–170 million people have Hepatitis C. Scientists began studying the Hepatitis C virus in the 1970s, and in 1989 they proved that the virus exists. As far as scientists know, this virus does not cause disease in any animals other than humans.
The medications that are normally used to treat Hepatitis C are called peginterferon and ribavirin. Between 50-80% of people who are treated (or 5 to 8 out of every 10) are cured. However, if a person's Hepatitis C has progressed (or gotten worse) so much that the person has cirrhosis or liver cancer, the person might need a liver transplant (they might need to have surgery where they are given another person's liver, or part of another person's liver). This makes it possible for the person to survive, but the Hepatitis C virus usually comes back after the transplant. There is no vaccine that works to prevent people from getting Hepatitis C.


== Signs and symptoms ==
Hepatitis C causes acute symptoms (symptoms that begin quickly or last only a short time) in just 15% of people with the disease. More often, infected people have symptoms that are mild (not serious) and vague (not very specific), like a decreased appetite (not feeling like eating), fatigue (feeling tired), nausea (feeling like throwing up), pain in the muscles or joints, and losing weight. Every once in a while, an infected person may get jaundice (where a person's skin turns yellow, a sign that their liver is not working quite right). If it is not treated, Hepatitis C goes away by itself in 10-50% of infected people (1 to 5 out of every 10). This happens more often in young women than in other infected people.


=== Chronic infection ===
Eighty percent (or 8 out of every 10) of people exposed to the Hepatitis C virus get a chronic infection (one that does not get better and lasts for a long time). Most experience very few or no symptoms during the first decades of the infection, although chronic Hepatitis C can cause fatigue (feeling tired). But in people who have been infected for many years, Hepatitis C can cause serious problems, like cirrhosis and liver cancer. Hepatitis C leads to cirrhosis in 10–30% (between 10 and 30 out of every 100) of people who have been infected over 30 years. People with Hepatitis C are more likely to get cirrhosis if they are men; if they are alcoholics; or if they also have Hepatitis B or HIV. Cirrhosis can cause serious problems on its own, but it also makes people more likely to get other serious illnesses. For example, people who get cirrhosis are twenty times more likely to get liver cancer (with about 1-3% getting liver cancer every year). People with Hepatitis C who are alcoholics are even more likely - 100 times more likely - to get liver cancer. Among people in general, 27% of all cases of cirrhosis, and 25% of all cases of liver cancer, are caused by Hepatitis C.
Cirrhosis of the liver can cause many different symptoms. Some of these symptoms are high blood pressure in the veins that travel to the liver; a buildup of fluid in the abdomen, called ascites; easy bruising or bleeding; veins becoming larger than normal, especially in the stomach and esophagus; jaundice (a yellowing of the skin); and brain damage.


=== Effects outside the liver ===
Hepatitis C can also cause some rare problems (problems which do not happen very often), which affect parts of the body outside of the liver. One rare problem that Hepatitis C can cause is Sjögren's syndrome, an autoimmune disorder (or a disorder where the body's system of defenses attacks itself). Hepatitis C can also cause a lower-than-normal number of blood platelets (the part of the blood which causes blood to clot; without enough platelets, a person can have bleeding problems, or can start bleeding and be unable to stop. Other rare problems that Hepatitis C can cause are chronic (long-lasting) skin disease; non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (a type of cancer); and diabetes (where a person's body does not make or use enough insulin, an important hormone that controls the level of sugar in the blood).


== Cause ==

Hepatitis C is caused by the Hepatitis C virus (HCV). In the scientific system that names and organizes viruses, the Hepatitis C virus is part of the hepacivirus genus in the family Flaviviridae. There are seven major types of HCV, called "genotypes". In the United States, the first genotype of HCV causes 70% of all cases of Hepatitis C (or 7 out of every 10); the second genotype causes 20% (or 2 out of every 10); and each of the other genotypes causes 1% (or 1 out of every 100 cases). Thr first genotype is also the most common in South America and Europe.


=== Transmission ===
In the developed world, the most common way that people get Hepatitis C is through intravenous drug use (by shooting drugs into a vein, using a needle that was already used by a person who has Hepatitis C). In the developing world, most people get Hepatitis C through blood transfusions (being given blood that was taken from a person with Hepatitis C) or by getting medical care with tools that were not cleaned enough after being used on a person with Hepatitis C. In 20% of all cases of Hepatitis C (or 1 in every 5 cases), it is not known what caused the infection, but many of these cases are thought to have been caused by intravenous drug use.


==== Intravenous drug use ====
In many parts of the world, intravenous (IV) drug use (shooting drugs into a vein using a needle) is a major risk factor for Hepatitis C (meaning that it makes people more likely to get the disease). One study that looked at 77 countries showed that in 25 of these countries (including the United States), between 60% and 80% (or 6 to 8 out of every 10) of all IV drug users had Hepatitis C. and China. In twelve of the countries in the study, more than 80% of all IV drug users had Hepatitis C. Across the world, as many as ten million IV drug users are thought to have Hepatitis C; the highest totals are in China (1.6 million), the United States (1.5 million), and Russia (1.3 million). Studies have also shown that in places where there are high numbers of IV drug users, people are more likely to have Hepatitis C. For example, prisoners in the United States are ten to twenty times more likely than the general population (people in general) to have Hepatitis C. This is thought to be because prisoners are more likely to things that put them at high risk for getting Hepatitis C, like using IV drugs and getting tattoos with tools that have not been cleaned properly.


==== Healthcare exposure ====
Peoples are at risk for getting Hepatitis C if they get blood transfusions (where a person is given blood from another person), blood products (which have blood or parts of blood in them), or organ transplants (where a person who needs a new organ is given an organ from another person), if these things have not been screened (or tested) for the Hepatitis C virus. In the United States, there has been universal screening - meaning that all blood and organs are tested before being given to another person - since 1992. Before then, about one out of every 200 units of blood carried the Hepatitis C virus; since 1992, only one in 10,000 to 10,000,000 units of blood carry the virus. The reason that there is still a low risk, instead of no risk at all, is that a person's blood does not test positive for the Hepatitis C virus until about 11–70 days after they get the disease. So every once in a while, the screening tests may not pick up on a person's infection if the person got Hepatitis C less than 11–70 days before giving blood. While Hepatitis C screening works very well, some countries still do not screen blood and organ donations for the disease because of the cost.
Sometimes, a healthcare worker will accidentally get stuck with a needle that was used on a person with Hepatitis C. If this happens, the healthcare worker has a small chance - about a 1.8% chance - of becoming infected. The worker is more likely to get infected if the needle they were stuck with was hollow, or if the needle stuck deeply into their skin It is also possible for the Hepatitis C virus to spread if an infected person's mucus touches another person's blood; however, the risk of this happening is low. The virus cannot be spread if an infected person's mucus touches another person's intact skin (skin that is whole and not damaged, with no wounds).
Hepatitis C can also be transmitted (or spread) through hospital equipment that has not been cleaned enough after being used on an infected person. Hepatitis C can be spread through needles, syringes, and medication vials (or containers) that are re-used; through infusion bags (which are used to pump medications into a person's body; and through surgical equipment that is not sterile (or clean and free of germs). In Egypt, which has the highest rate of infection in the world, medical and dental facilities with poor standards of care and cleanliness are the most common reason that Hepatitis C spreads.


==== Sexual intercourse ====
Scientists do not know whether Hepatitis C can be transmitted (or spread) through sex. Hepatitis C is more likely in people who have high-risk sexual activity (sexual actions which make them much more likely to get Hepatitis C). However, it is not known whether this is because of these people's sexual behavior, or because these people were also using IV drugs. There does not seem to be any risk that Hepatitis C can be spread through sexual contact between a heterosexual couple (a man and a woman; commonly called a "straight" couple) if neither person has sex with anyone else. There does seem to be a risk of Hepatitis C spreading if one person already has a sexually transmitted infection, like HIV or genital ulceration; or if two people have sex in a way that causes wounds to the lining of the anal canal (like anal penetration - one person putting his penis into another person's anus). The United States government says that most people need to use condoms to protect themselves from getting Hepatitis C only if they have more than one sexual partner.


==== Body piercings ====
People who get tattoos are about two to three times more likely to get Hepatitis C. This can be because of tools that are not sterile (not clean or free of germs), or because the dyes used for tattooing are contaminated (the Hepatitis C virus has gotten inside of them).
Tattoos or body piercings that were done before the mid-1980s or by people who are not professionals (not experts) are especially likely to spread Hepatitis C, since they are more likely to have used tools that were not sterile. Bigger tattoos also seem to put a person at more risk of getting Hepatitis C. The risk of getting Hepatitis C is very high in prisons; in the United States, almost half of all prison inmates share tattooing tools that are not sterile. However, if a tattoo is done in a licensed place of business (which has to follow rules about cleaning tools and preventing diseases from spreading), there is almost no risk of getting Hepatitis C from the tattoo.


==== Contact with blood ====
Because Hepatitis C is spread by blood-to-blood contact, personal-care tools which come into contact with blood - like razors, toothbrushes, and manicure or pedicure equipment or any other kind of blood to blood contact - can spread the disease if they are shared. To prevent the spread of Hepatitis C, people should be careful with cuts, sores, or anything else that causes bleeding. Hepatitis C does not spread through casual contact, such as hugging, kissing, or sharing eating or cooking utensils.


==== Transmission from mother to child ====
Although this does not happen very often, a pregnant woman who has Hepatitis C can give the disease to her baby when it is born, or to her fetus while she is pregnant. This happens in less than 10% of all pregnancies (less than 1 out of every 10 pregnancies). If a pregnant woman has Hepatitis C, nothing can be done to make her less likely to give her baby the disease. If the woman is in labor (the process of delivering her baby) for a long time, there is more of a chance that the baby will become infected during the birth. Breastfeeding does not seem to spread the disease. However, doctors say that an infected mother should not breastfeed if her nipples are cracked and bleeding, or her viral loads (the amount of the Hepatitis C virus in her blood) are high.


== Diagnosis ==
There are a few different tests that can diagnose Hepatitis C (or say for sure that a person has the disease). These tests are called HCV antibody, ELISA, Western blot, and quantitative HCV RNA tests. A technique called polymerase chain reaction (PCR) can show that a person has Hepatitis C virus RNA (part of the virus's genetic blueprint) one to two weeks after the person becomes infected. Tests that look for Hepatitis C antibodies (which the body makes to fight the disease) cannot be done this quickly after infection, because the antibodies can take much longer to form and show up.
A person has chronic Hepatitis C if he has been infected with the Hepatitis C virus for more than six months. Because people with chronic Hepatitis C often have no symptoms for decades, doctors often diagnose it through liver function tests (which test how well the liver is working) or by doing routine (regular) screening of high-risk people. Tests cannot tell whether an infection is acute or chronic.


=== Blood testing ===
Hepatitis C testing usually begins with blood tests that look for antibodies to the Hepatitis C virus, using a technique called an enzyme immunoassay. If this test is positive (showing that the body is making antibodies to fight the Hepatitis C virus), the person will be tested a second time to make sure that the results are correct and to see how serious the infection is. The results are confirmed using a technique called a recombinant immunoblot assay, and an HCV RNA polymerase chain reaction shows how serious the infection is. If the immunoblot is positive, but there are no Hepatitis C virus RNA, this shows that the person had an infection, but it cleared up either with treatment or on its own. If the immunoblot is negative, this shows that the immunoassay (the first test) was wrong, and the person does not have Hepatitis C. It takes six to eight weeks after a person gets infected before the immunoassay will test positive.
During the first part of a Hepatitis C infection, a person's liver enzymes may change; on average, they begin to rise seven weeks after infection. A person's liver enzymes usually do not affect how severe their infection is.


=== Biopsy ===
A test called a liver biopsy can show whether a person's liver has been damaged, or how badly it has been damaged, by Hepatitis C. However, there are some risks from the procedure. In a biopsy, a doctor takes a small piece out of the patient's liver so that he can test it. There are three major changes to the liver that a biopsy usually shows. One is that lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell) show up in the liver tissue. Another is that lymphoid follicles (small masses or swellings) show up in the portal triad, a part of the liver. The third is changes to the bile ducts (these carry bile, which is made in the liver and is needed to help a person digest their food, to other parts of the body). Many blood tests are available which try to measure how much damage there is to a patient's liver, in order to avoid the need for a biopsy and its risks.


=== Screening ===
As few as 5–50% of infected people in the United States and Canada (or 5 to 50 out of every 100) know that they have Hepatitis C. Doctors suggest that people who are at high risk for the disease, including people with tattoos, should get tested. Screening is also suggested for people with elevated (high) liver enzymes, since this is often the only sign that a person has chronic hepatitis. Routine screening (testing everyone) is not recommended in the United States.


== Prevention ==
As of 2012, there is no vaccine that works to prevent Hepatitis C. Researchers are working on vaccines, are some are making progress. The spread of Hepatitis C can be prevented by using a combination of strategies, like needle exchange programs (where IV drug users can get clean needles which will not spread the virus) and treatment for drug abuse. If these strategies are used together, the risk of IV drug users getting Hepatitis C drops by about 75%. At a national level - within each country - screening blood donors is important for preventing the spread of Hepatitis C. So is using universal precautions in healthcare facilities. (This means that healthcare workers treat every patient as if he has Hepatitis C, and they always wear gloves, clean their equipment properly, and keep things sterile so that diseases cannot be spread.) In countries that do not have enough sterile syringes to use a new needle for every patient, healthcare providers should give medications orally (by mouth) rather than via injection (using a needle) so that needles do not have to be re-used.


== Treatment ==
The Hepatitis C virus causes chronic infection in 50–80% of infected persons (or 5 to 8 out of every 10). About 40-80% of these cases (or 4 to 8 out of 10) clear up with treatment. Although this almost never happens, chronic Hepatitis C can sometimes clear up on its own, without treatment. Doctors suggest that people with chronic Hepatitis C should avoid drinking alcohol and taking medications that can be toxic (or poisonous) to the liver. They also suggest that people with chronic infections should be given vaccines for Hepatitis A and Hepatitis B. People with cirrhosis should also have ultrasound tests for liver cancer.


=== Medications ===
If a person has liver abnormalities (changes in the liver that are not normal) due to Hepatitis C virus infection, the person should get treatment. The first treatment that is used is a drug called pegylated interferon given together with the antiviral (virus-killing) drug ribavirin. These medications are given for 24 or 48 weeks, depending on what type of Hepatitis C virus the person has. About 50–60% of people who are treated improve. For people with Hepatitis C virus genotype 1, treatment may work even better if another medication - either boceprevir or telaprevir - is given along with ribavirin and peginterferon alfa. Side effects with treatment are common; half of people treated get flu-like symptoms, and a third have emotional problems. Treatment works better if it is given during the first six months than after Hepatitis C becomes chronic. If a person gets a new infection and it has not cleared up after eight to twelve weeks, doctors usually suggest giving pegylated interferon for another 24 weeks. For people with thalassemia (a blood disorder), ribavirin appears to be a helpful treatment, but it makes it more likely for patients to need blood transfusions (where they need to be given blood from another person). Some supporters of alternative medicine say that alternative therapies like milk thistle, ginseng, and colloidal silver can be helpful for Hepatitis C. However, there is no proof that any alternative therapy has any effect on the Hepatitis C virus.


== Likely outcome ==
People respond differently to treatment, depending on which of the Hepatitis C virus genotypes they have. About 40-50% in people with genotype 1 have a good, stable response with 48 weeks of treatment. In people with genotypes 2 and 3, about 70-80% have a good, stable response with 24 weeks of treatment. About 65% of people with genotype 4 have a good, stable response with 48 weeks of treatment. There is not much evidence about how well treatment works for people with genotype 6 disease is currently sparse. The evidence that does exist looks at results after 48 weeks of treatment at the same medication doses as people with genotype 1.


== Epidemiology ==

Between 130 and 170 million people, or about 3% of all of the people in the world, are living with chronic Hepatitis C. Between 3–4 million people get infected per year. More than 350,000 people die every year from diseases caused by Hepatitis C. The numbers of people getting Hepatitis C have increased a lot in the 20th century for a few different reasons. More people are using IV drugs. Also, more people are getting medical care with medical equipment that is not sterile, and it is more common for medications to be given intravenously.
In the United States, about 2% of people have hepatitis C, with 35,000 to 185,000 new cases a year. Rates have decreased in the West since the 1990s due to improved blood screening before transfusion. Annual deaths from HCV in the United States range from 8,000 to 10,000. Expectations are that this mortality rate will increase as people infected by transfusion before HCV testing become ill and die.
Infection rates are higher in some countries in Africa and Asia. Countries with very high rates of infection include Egypt (22%), Pakistan (4.8%) and China (3.2%). The high rate in Egypt is linked to a now-discontinued mass-treatment campaign for schistosomiasis, using improperly sterilized glass syringes.


== History ==
In the mid-1970s, Harvey J. Alter, Chief of the Infectious Disease Section in the Department of Transfusion Medicine at the National Institutes of Health, and his research team demonstrated that most post-blood transfusion hepatitis cases were not due to hepatitis A or B viruses. Despite this discovery, international research efforts to identify the virus failed for the next decade. In 1987, Michael Houghton, Qui-Lim Choo, and George Kuo at Chiron Corporation, collaborating with Dr. D.W. Bradley from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, used a new molecular cloning approach to identify the unknown organism and develop a diagnostic test. In 1988, Alter confirmed the virus by verifying its presence in a panel of non A non B hepatitis specimens. In April 1989, the discovery of HCV was published in two articles in the journal Science. The discovery led to significant improvements in diagnosis and improved antiviral treatment. In 2000, Drs. Alter and Houghton were honored with the Lasker Award for Clinical Medical Research for "pioneering work leading to the discovery of the virus that causes hepatitis C and the development of screening methods that reduced the risk of blood transfusion-associated hepatitis in the U.S. from 30% in 1970 to virtually zero in 2000."
Chiron filed for several patents on the virus and its diagnosis. A competing patent application by the CDC was dropped in 1990 after Chiron paid $1.9 million to the CDC and $337,500 to Bradley. In 1994, Bradley sued Chiron, seeking to invalidate the patent, have himself included as a coinventor, and receive damages and royalty income. He dropped the suit in 1998 after losing before an appeals court.


== Society and culture ==
The World Hepatitis Alliance coordinates World Hepatitis Day, held every year on July 28. The economic costs of hepatitis C are significant both to the individual and to society. In the United States the average lifetime cost of the disease was estimated at 33,407 USD in 2003, with the cost of a liver transplant approximately 200,000 USD as of 2011. In Canada the cost of a course of antiviral treatment was as high as 30,000 CAD in 2003, while the United States costs are between 9,200 and 17,600 in 1998 USD. In many areas of the world people are unable to afford treatment with antivirals because they lack insurance coverage or the insurance they have will not pay for antivirals.


== Research ==
As of 2011, about one hundred medications are in development for hepatitis C. These medicines include vaccines to treat hepatitis, immunomodulators, and cyclophilin inhibitors. These potentially new treatments have come about due to a better understanding of the hepatitis C virus.


== References ==For the small fish, go to seahorse

The hippocampus is part of the mammalian brain, and belongs to the limbic system. Humans and other mammals have two, one in each side of the brain. The hippocampus is under the cerebral cortex. It is important in spatial memory and navigation, and helps turn short-term memory into long-term memory. The hippocampus is named after the seahorse because its shape is similar.
In Alzheimer's disease, the hippocampus is one of the first regions of the brain to suffer damage; memory loss and disorientation are included among the early symptoms. People with extensive, bilateral hippocampal damage may experience anterograde amnesia – the inability to form or retain new memories.
The different neuronal cell types are neatly organized into layers in the hippocampus. It has often been used as a model system for studying neurophysiology. Long-term potentiation (LTP), a neural mechanism for storing memory, was first discovered to occur in the hippocampus.


== Hippocampus and memory ==
The connection of hippocampus with memory was made by a famous report. This gave the results of the destruction of the hippocampi by surgery (an attempt to relieve epileptic seizures). The unexpected outcome of the surgery was severe anterograde and partial retrograde amnesia. The patient could not form new memories of events after his surgery, and could not remember any events that occurred just before his surgery. However, he did remember events from many years earlier, right back to his childhood.
This case attracted widespread professional interest. Later, other patients with similar damage and amnesia (caused by accident or disease) have also been studied. Thousands of experiments have studied the physiology of changes in synaptic connections in the hippocampus after activity. The hippocampi do play an important role in memory. However, the precise nature of this role remains unclear.
Recent reviews say how the hippocampus puts together our memories of past events, and helps us remember aspects of complex events.


== Hippocampus and orientation ==
Neurons in the rat hippocampus show activity related to the rat's position in its environment. As with the memory theory, there is now almost universal agreement that spatial coding plays an important role in hippocampal function, but the details are widely debated.
Studies conducted on freely moving rats and mice have shown that many hippocampal neurons have "place fields", that is, they fire bursts of action potentials when a rat passes through a particular part of the environment. In humans, cells with location-specific firing patterns have been reported in a study. Patients with drug-resistant epilepsy had diagnostic electrodes put in their hippocampus. Then a computer was used to move them around in a virtual reality town.
The discovery of place cells in the 1970s led to a theory that the hippocampus might act as a cognitive map –a neural representation of the layout of the environment. The "cognitive map hypothesis" has been further advanced by recent discoveries of direction cells in several parts of the rodent brain which are strongly connected to the hippocampus.


== Evolution ==

The hippocampus has a generally similar appearance across the mammals from monotremes such as the echidna to primates such as humans. The hippocampal size to body-size ratio increases: it is about twice as large for primates as for the echidna. It does not, however, increase at anywhere close to the rate of the neocortex to body-size ratio. Therefore, the hippocampus takes up a larger fraction of the cortex in rodents than in primates.
Other vertebrates have areas which may be homologous to the hippocampus of mammals. Some insects, and cephalopods such as the octopus, have strong spatial learning and navigation abilities. These appear to work differently from the mammalian spatial system, and have evolved independently of the mammalian system.


== References ==Hodgkin's lymphoma, also known as Hodgkin's disease, is a cancer of the lymphatic system, also known as a lymphoma. It was first discovered by Thomas Hodgkin in 1832. It is one of many kinds of cancers of the lymphatic system. Most of the time, the cancer develops in a single lymph node before it spreads to the rest of the body. The symptoms of Hodgkin's lymphoma change as the disease progresses. At the first stage of the disease, the person may feel a lump on the affected lymph node that does not hurt when touched. The person may have strange fevers, sweating during the night, and itchy skin. In the later stages of the disease, the person may feel very tired and their spleen may grow larger.Hyperglycemia means high blood sugar levels at or beyond 200 mg/dl. It is a serious and life threatening health problem that can be fatal if not properly treated in time.
In a healthy body, insulin helps glucose (sugar) get from the blood into the body's cells. There, the cells can use the sugar to make energy. However, when there is not enough insulin in the body, or if a person's body does not react to insulin normally (this is called insulin resistance), too much sugar stays in the blood. This can cause serious health problems.
Extremely high blood sugar means diabetes mellitus, a condition that often causes very high blood sugar. Hyperglycemia that comes and goes may mean diabetes of any kind, or may be developing under low insulin levels or resistance to insulin.


== Symptoms ==


=== Early Signs ===
Three of the early signs of hyperglycemia are "the 3 polys": polydipsia (feeling very thirsty), polyphagia (feeling very hungry), and polyuria (urinating a lot). These things happen because:
The body senses that its cells are not getting enough sugar. The body triggers hunger, because eating is usually how people get sugar. This causes polyphagia.
The body senses that there is too much sugar in the blood, and tries to urinate out the extra sugar. This causes polyuria.
Because the person is urinating so much, they get dehydrated easily and get very thirsty (polydipsia).
Other early signs of high blood sugar include blurred vision, headache, and feeling tired.


=== Late Signs ===
If hyperglycemia gets worse or is not treated, it can cause toxic acids called ketones to build up in the blood and urine. This is called diabetic ketoacidosis, which is a medical emergency.
Symptoms of diabetic ketoacidosis can include:
Confusion, seizures, or coma
Difficulty breathing with fruity-smelling breath ("ketone breath" - caused by the body trying to blow off the toxic ketones through breathing out)
Weakness
Nausea, vomiting, and abdominal painHypermetropia is the technical name for a problem that may happen with the human eye. It is commonly called being long sighted or far sighted. Hyperopia can make a person unable to see nearby objects clearly because they appear blurred, while faraway objects are clear.Hypertension or high blood pressure, is a chronic medical condition in which the blood pressure in the arteries is higher than it should be. This requires the heart to work harder than normal to circulate blood through the blood vessels.


== Blood pressure ==

The pressure in the arteries changes depending on what the heart is doing. When the heart squeezes, pumping blood into the arteries, the pressure increases. When the heart relaxes, the pressure decreases. When blood pressure is measured, the highest pressure (when the heart is squeezing) is called the systolic blood pressure. The lowest pressure (when the heart is relaxing) is called the diastolic blood pressure.
Blood pressure is written as two numbers. For example, in the picture at the right, the person's systolic blood pressure was 158. Their diastolic blood pressure was 99. This blood pressure is written as 158/99. It is said "158 over 99."


== Types of hypertension ==
There are two types of hypertension, called “primary” and “secondary.” Primary hypertension means that the hypertension is not caused by any other disease. Secondary hypertension means that the hypertension is caused by another disease. In most cases (90-95%), hypertension is primary. Only a small amount of hypertension (5-10%) is secondary.


== Problems caused by hypertension ==
Hypertension can cause many problems, including heart attack, stroke, congestive heart failure, and kidney failure. To stay healthy, most people should try to keep their blood pressure below 140/90 mmHg.


== Treatment ==


=== Lifestyle changes ===
Hypertension can often be fixed with changes in diet or lifestyle. The 2004 British Hypertension Society suggests that people with high blood pressure:
Lose weight if they are overweight or obese
Exercise regularly
Decrease the amount of salt they eat
Limit the amount of alcohol they drink
Eat a lot of fruits and vegetables


=== Medicine ===
If lifestyle changes do not decrease a person's blood pressure, then the person may need medications. A doctor will choose which medications to use, based on what other medical problems the person has. Examples of medications that decrease blood pressure include:
Diuretics, which increase urination to get rid of extra fluid
Beta blockers, which slow down the heart rate
ACE inhibitors, which relax the arteries


=== Effectiveness ===
Even small decreases in blood pressure can have a large effect on a person's health. For example, decreasing blood pressure by 5 mmHg (for example, from 150/100 to 145/95 mmHg) can decrease the risk of stroke by 34%. It can also decrease the risk of heart disease by 21%.


== Related pages ==
Blood pressure
Heart
Arteries
Circulatory system
Hypotension (low blood pressure)


== References ==Hypopharyngeal Cancer is a type of cancer in which malignant cells grow in the hypopharynx (the area where the larynx and esophagus meet). This type of cancer is rare. Only about 2,500 cases are seen in the US each year.


== References ==Hypothermia is a condition when a person is so cold that the body temperature drops below normal. Hypothermia is any body temperature lower than 35.0 °C (95.0 °F). Someone with hypothermia starts shivering and cannot stop. The person then becomes confused and acts strange. Their words don't make sense and they may be clumsy. Sometimes they become very tired. If someone gets hypothermia, wrap the person in blankets and take them to the hospital. If that's impossible, warm up the person slowly and give them a warm drink.


== Mild ==
When hypothermia begins, a person feels cold, starts shivering and can't stop. The person cannot do complicated things with his or her hands. They are also unable to touch their thumb with their little finger, because their hand muscles don't work well.
Mild hypothermia is sometimes used on purpose by doctors for treating some medical problems. It takes blood away from the skin, hands and feet, and puts it to the brain and important internal organs. This helps when the person is bleeding from cuts or other wounds, and also helps when the patient goes into cardiac arrest.


== Moderate (Middle) ==
The person begins shivering very strongly. Their large muscles do not work well. They move slowly and with difficulty, growing a little confused and walking unsteadily. The person becomes pale, and lips, ears, fingers, and toes might become blue. This is because the body is trying to keep the most important organs warm. The person might feel sick in their stomach and very tired, wanting to go to sleep, anywhere.


== Severe ==
Body temperature drops even more, but the person usually stops shivering. They cannot talk clearly; they think slowly, and they cannot move their hands. Sometimes a person will feel suddenly warm, as if they are getting better, but this just means they are getting worse. They may take off warm clothes or lay down to go to sleep. If this continues, they cannot walk or answer questions. Their pulse becomes weaker, but the heart may beat faster. Finally, the person dies.


== Related pages ==
Hyperthermia


== References ==


== Other Websites ==
Princeton Outdoor Guide to Hypothermia
eMedicine: Hypothermia
Wilderness Management of HypothermiaHypothyroidism is a medical condition. If a person has hypothyroidism, their thyroid gland does not make enough hormones. It can be caused by many factors, but it is more common when a person has insufficient iodine. Severe hypothyroidism in infants can result in cretinism. Symptoms of hypothyroidism include the following: tiredness, headaches, weight gain, dry skin, constipation, and poor concentration.


== References ==Influenza, better known as the flu and sometimes called the grippe, is a common childhood illness, but is not as common among adults. It is not limited to humans, most mammals and many birds can also catch influenza. It is caused by several different viruses (see: RNA virus), which is why people can have the flu more than once.. The name influenza comes from Italian: influenza, meaning "influence".


== Flu transmission and symptoms ==
Human Influenza can pass from one person to another very easily. It is most commonly spread by the microscopic droplets of mucus and fluid that are sent into the air when the sick person coughs or sneezes. Symptoms include cough, sore throat, muscle aches and pains, fever, headache, and rarely vomiting and diarrhoea. Influenza can also lead to other diseases, such as pneumonia. This makes it especially dangerous to young children and elderly people.
Although there is no cure for influenza, Antiviral drugs can be used to treat the illness so it is not as severe and does not last as long.
The influenza season runs from late fall to spring because most people catch it in the winter months. When there are more cases of influenza than expected, it will sometimes be called an epidemic. When there are a large number of cases of the same type of influenza all over the world, it is often called a pandemic.


== Changes in the influenza virus ==
Small changes that happen as flu is passed from one person to another is the most common way flu viruses change. This is the main reason that people can catch the flu every year.
The CDC keeps track of the different flu viruses that are circulating, and gives this information to the companies that make flu shots. Since the flu changes so much from year to year, flu shots have to be given for each new flu season.
Flu shots only protect against the most common flu viruses, and every now and then a slightly different type spreads more than expected. Usually when this happens, the existing flu shot gives some protection so that even if a person who had a flu shot catches it, they do not get as sick.
Some flu viruses are caught from animals. Bird flu, for example, is usually only caught by people in contact with sick birds (usually chickens). These types of flu virus are usually very limited, and while they can make a person very ill, usually other people do not catch the virus from the sick person.
Another way that the flu can change is when a person or animal catches two different flu viruses. The two viruses can exchange some of their genetic information, which can create a brand new flu that nobody has ever caught before.
If an animal flu virus changes in this way to one that can easily pass from human to human, many people become ill because nobody has any immunity to the new virus. Often, a brand new virus is more severe and kills more people.
New types of flu virus are usually what causes pandemics, and that is the reason many scientists have been following Bird Flu so closely—it kills six people out of every ten who catch it. This would be a very serious problem if it changes enough to spread easily between people.


== Swine flu (March/April 2009) ==
This new flu virus got its name because it contains genetic parts that are commonly found in flu viruses that infect pigs. It is not spread by pigs or by eating pork—this is a new human virus being spread by humans.
Although information is still coming out about swine flu, so far it does not seem to be as severe as bird flu or the flu that caused the influenza pandemic of 1918 (also known as Spanish flu), but it is much too early to predict whether it will cause the next flu pandemic.


== References ==


== Other websites ==
CDC info on influenza
World Health Organization Fact Sheet Overview of influenza.
NHS Direct Health encyclopedia entry
Both overview and technical details on influenza viruses with emphasis on the potential H5N1 pandemic Includes details of various nonhuman influenza viruses. Extensive and well done.
Another overview of influenzaThe Jacobson's organ, is part of the body that helps an animal smell things. It is found in many animals. It was discovered by Frederik Ruysch and later by Ludwig Jacobson in 1813. It is also called the vomeronasal organ or VNO.
This body part is mainly used to detect pheromones, chemicas that carry information between individuals of the same species. So, sometimes it is called the "sixth sense."


== References ==Kidney cancer is a form of cancer that begins in the kidneys. Common forms include Wilms tumor, which occurs in children, and renal cell carcinoma.


== Treatment ==
Treatment of renal cancer depends on the type of cancer. For renal cell carcinoma, removing the kidney, (Nephrectomy), is the best treatment when the cancer is localized. Removing a part of the kidney, (partial nephrectomy) may also be an option for some patients.


== References ==Kuru is a disease caused by cannibalism, specifically eating human brains. It is also known as the "laughing sickness" due to the pathologic bursts of laughter that the patient displays.
Kuru was found in Papua New Guinea, among members of the Fore tribe. The word kuru means "trembling with fear" in the Fore language.


== References ==The lacrimal bone is the smallest bone in the face; about the size of the little fingernail. It is at the front of the inside wall of the eye socket.
The lacrimal bone is involved in crying. It is part of the tear duct, where tears drain from the eye. The lacrimal sac is where tears flow when you cry. The tears then go down a duct inside the nose. This is why you can get a runny nose from crying. 


== More images ==


== References ==The large intestine is also called the colon or large bowel. It connects the small intestine to the rectum and anus. It is about 1.5 meters long or 5 feet. It is shorter than the small intestine, but its diameter is larger.
Water is absorbed here and the remaining waste material is stored as faeces before being removed by defecation.


== References ==


== Other websites ==
Overview and diagrams at seer.cancer.gov
09-118h. at Merck Manual of Diagnosis and Therapy Home Edition
Photo at mgccc.cc.ms.us
MeSH Large+IntestineLaryngeal cancer may also be called cancer of the larynx or laryngeal carcinoma. Most laryngeal cancers are squamous cell carcinomas, reflecting their origin from the squamous cells which form the majority of the laryngeal epithelium. Cancer can develop in any part of the larynx, but the cure rate is affected by the location of the tumour.


== References ==The lateral sulcus (also called Sylvian fissure or lateral fissure) is one of the most prominent structures of the human brain. It divides the frontal lobe and parietal lobe above from the temporal lobe below. It is in both hemispheres of the brain. A sulcus is a depression or groove in the cerebral cortex.
The lateral sulcus first appears around the fourteenth week of gestation.


== References ==Legionnaires' disease is a form of pneumonia caused by any type of Legionella bacteria. Over 90% of cases are caused by Legionella pneumophila.
The length of time between exposure to the bacteria and the appearance of symptoms is generally two to ten days. It can be as much as 20 days. People with Legionnaires' usually have fever, chills, and a cough. Some also have muscle aches, headache, tiredness, loss of appetite, diarrhea or vomiting.
People of any age may have Legionnaires' disease. It is most common in middle aged and older people.


== References ==Leishmaniasis or leishmaniosis is a disease caused by protozoan parasites of the genus Leishmania. It is spread by the bite of certain types of sandflies.
The disease has three forms:
Cutaneous leishmaniasis: skin ulcers
Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis: ulcers of the skin, mouth and nose
Visceral leishmaniasis: starts with skin ulcers, then fever, low red blood cells, and a large spleen and liver
Leishmaniasis in humans is caused by more than 20 species of Leishmania. Risk factors include poverty, malnutrition, deforestation and urbanization. All three types can be diagnosed by identifying the parasites under a microscope. The visceral form can be diagnosed with a blood test.
Leishmaniasis can be partly prevented by sleeping under nets treated with insecticide. Another way is using insecticides to kill sandflies. Early treatment of people with the disease also helps prevent further spread. The treatment needed is determined by where the disease is acquired, the species of Leishmania and the type of infection. Medications used for the visceral form include: liposomal amphotericin B, a combination of pentavalent antimonials and paromomycin, and miltefosine. For the cutaneous form, paromomycin, fluconazole or pentamidine can help.
As of 2014, about 12 million people are infected in some 98 countries. There are about 2 million new cases each year. Each year, between 20 thousand and 50 thousand people die from the disease. About 200 million people in Asia, Africa, South and Central America and southern Europe live in areas where the disease is common. The World Health Organization has gotten discounts on some medications to treat the disease.
The parasites that cause the disease also infect other mammals: The disease has been described in dogs, cats, rodents, cattle and horses. In addition to the mammal, the parasite needs an insect that spreads the parasite through its sting.


== Lifecycle of the parasite ==

Leishmaniasis is transmitted by the bite of infected female sandflies. These can transmit the infection Leishmania. The sandflies inject the infective stage, metacyclic promastigotes, during blood meals (1). Metacyclic promastigotes that reach the puncture wound are phagocytized by macrophages (2) and transform into amastigotes (3). Amastigotes multiply in infected cells and affect different tissues, depending in part on which Leishmania species is involved (4). The differences in the type of tissue affected are responsible for the different visible types of leishmaniasis. Sandflies become infected during blood meals on infected hosts when they ingest macrophages infected with amastigotes (5,6). In the sandfly's midgut, the parasites differentiate into promastigotes (7), which multiply, differentiate into metacyclic promastigotes, and migrate to the proboscis (8).
The genomes of three Leishmania species have been sequenced and this has provided much information about the biology of the parasite. Leishmania has unique features with respect to the regulation of gene expression in response to changes in the environment. The new knowledge from these studies may help identify new targets for drugs and aid the development of vaccines.


== References ==The crystalline lens is a transparent, biconvex structure in the eye. With the cornea it helps to refract light to be focused on the retina. The lens changes shape. This changes the focal distance of the eye so that it can focus on objects at various distances. This adjustment of the lens is called accommodation. It is similar to the focusing of a photographic camera when it focuses its lenses. The lens is flatter on the inside.
The lens is also called the aquula (Latin, a little stream, dim. of aqua, water) or crystalline lens. In humans, the refractive power of the lens in its natural environment is approximately 18 dioptres. This is about one-third of the eye's total power.


== Related pages ==
Melatonin
Visual perception
CataractLung cancer is the uncontrolled growth of abnormal cells in one or both of the lungs. Cigarette smoking causes most lung cancers when smoke gets in the lungs. Lung cancer kills 1.3 million people each year, more than any other cancer. It is currently the leading cause of cancer death in both men and women, it kills more women than breast cancer, ovarian cancer and uterine cancers together.
The large majority of people who get lung cancer have smoked for many years. However, there are types of lung cancers that appear in otherwise healthy patients who have never smoked.
There are two main types of lung cancer, small cell lung cancer and non-small cell lung cancer. Small cell lung cancer typically responds well to chemotherapy and radiotherapy, and non-small cell lung cancer is more commonly treated with surgical removal of the lung tumor.
Non-small cell lung cancer
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) account for about 85% to 90% of lung cancer cases. There are three types of non-small cell lung cancer:
Squamous cell (epidermoid) carcinoma
Adenocarcinoma
Large cell (undifferentiated) carcinoma


== References ==Lupus, or Lupus erythematosus, is a disease of the immune system. It is chronic, which means it does not go away. It is an autoimmune disease, where the person's immune system attacks their own body.
The immune system is partly made up of white blood cells in your body that fight off disease. In lupus, these white blood cells think that the healthy cells of the body around them are diseased, so they end up attacking healthy parts of the body. Lupus can be deadly. It causes swelling and tissue damage, and can attack any part of the body. It most commonly affects the heart, joints, skin, lungs, blood vessels, kidneys and the brain/nervous system. Some symptoms include: fatigue, fever with no cause, hair loss, mouth sores, sensitivity to sunlight, a skin disease, and Raynaud's syndrome. There is treatment for lupus, called immunosuppression, which is medicine that stops the white blood cells from damaging healthy cells for a while. After a while, this medicine wears off, and then the white blood cells go back to hurting healthy parts of the body again. For the disease of lupus, there is no cure that stops the white blood cells from attacking healthy parts of the body forever, but doctors are not giving up on finding a cure.
Lupus takes its name from the Latin word "lupus", meaning wolf. This is because a lupus-caused rash on a person's face makes the person's face look like the face of a wolf. In the United States alone, there may be 270,000 to 1.5 million (1,500,000) people with lupus. Worldwide, it is estimated (not known for sure, but a good guess) that over 5 million (5,000,000) people living with lupus.[source?] The disease mainly affects young women, but men can be affected as well.


== Famous people with lupus ==
Disney Star Selena Gomez was diagnosed with lupus in 2013.
The pop singer Michael Jackson was diagnosed with systemic lupus in 1986.
Toni Braxton has systemic lupus.


== References ==Malaria is an infectious disease caused by a parasite: it is spread by the bite of an infected mosquito. People catch malaria when the parasite enters the blood. The parasite causes a deadly infection which kills many people each year.
The parasite that causes malaria is a protozoan called Plasmodium. Protozoa are organisms with only one cell, but they are not bacteria. Bacterias are smaller and simpler than protozoans.
People usually get malaria from the Anopheles or Culex mosquitoes: they are the vectors of the disease. The Plasmodium gets into people by the bites of mosquitoes. The Plasmodium is in the mosquito's special saliva. The mosquito's saliva injects an anticoagulant into the person to prevent their blood from clotting. The person is then infected with Plasmodium as a by-product. This makes the person have the disease we call malaria.
Only the female mosquito gives people malaria, because only the female mosquito consumes blood. The male mosquito lives on the nectar of flowers. The female uses blood as a source of protein for its eggs.
Some people do not get malaria from mosquitoes. A baby can get it while inside its mother. This is called maternal-foetal transmission. People can also get malaria from a blood transfusion. This is when someone gives blood to another person. Another way people can catch malaria is by using a needle that someone with the disease used before them.


== Malaria parasite life cycle ==

There are several species (kinds) of Plasmodium that cause malaria in humans:
serious disease:
Plasmodium falciparum

milder disease:
Plasmodium malariae
Plasmodium ovale
Plasmodium vivax

species which normally infect other primates:
Plasmodium knowesli

P. vivax and P. falciparum cause the most malaria in people. Falciparum malaria is the worst kind, and kills the most people.
When Plasmodium enters the blood, they are then called sporozoites. Sporozoites go to the liver, where they make many more sporozoites. Then they change into a different form of Plasmodium. This form is the merozoite. The merozoites go into the red blood cells, then they make many more merozoites.
The merozoites break out of the red blood cells again and again. When they do this, the person gets very sick, and shows symptoms of malaria. This happens every few days, and is called a paroxysm.
P. vivax and P. ovale can live in the liver for a long time. A person can look well, but still have the Plasmodium in the liver. This is called a dormant phase. Weeks or months later, the Plasmodium can leave the liver to the blood, and the person will get sick again.
P. falciparum is the most dangerous type of malaria. It makes people sicker than those with other types of malaria, because there are more of them in the blood. Also, with falciparum malaria, the red blood cells are sticky. This makes the red blood cells block blood vessels. If blood vessels are blocked, this can hurt what the blood vessel brings blood to, and can hurt people's organs.


== Who is affected by malaria ==

Pregnant women and children are hurt most by malaria. When they get malaria, they get sicker.
40% of people live in a place where there is malaria. Malaria is in these places:
Africa
Asia (mostly in India, the Middle East, and Southeast Asia)
Central and South America
Hispaniola
Eastern Europe
South Pacific (the part of the Pacific Ocean south of the equator)
Every year, 300 to 700 million people get malaria. It kills 1 million to 2 million people every year. 90% of the deaths occur in Africa. Most of the people who die from malaria are children. Even if children do not die, many have brain damage.
Many of these deaths might be stopped with medicine or mosquito control. But many of the places malaria may be found are in poor countries. These countries do not have enough money to stop the mosquitoes, or to give people medicine. Money, however, is not the only problem. A country must have an organised medical system to provide services. Many countries in central Africa have been disrupted by warfare and conflict between groups, and general unrest. Also, easy solutions to kill the parasites do not exist as they did 50 years ago. This is because the insects are resistant to many insecticides, and the Plasmodium parasite is highly resistant to quinine and most other common drugs. This is a normal evolutionary process: the chemicals weed out the non-resistant organisms, and the offspring of the few resistant organisms multiply.


== Signs and symptoms of malaria ==

Symptoms are changes in someone's body that are signs for a disease. Most people who get malaria get symptoms 10–30 days after they get infected (the Plasmodium gets in their blood.) But some people can get symptoms after only a week, and some may be infected with malaria and not have symptoms for a year.
The most common symptom of malaria is fever, when the body temperature is high. The fever from malaria usually comes very suddenly. The people who have Malaria often feel like they had influenza.
Symptoms of malaria are:
Arthralgia (pain in joints)
Headache (pain in head)
Feeling very tired or sleepy
Cough
Chills (feeling very cold)
Delirium (when people are very confused because of a disease. They may look drunk. They may not be able to talk.)
Coma (when people are not conscious. They look like they are asleep, but they cannot be woken. )
Signs of malaria:
Anemia (low red blood cell levels in the blood)
Diarrhea
Jaundice (yellow skin and eyes)
Sweating
Vomiting
Fast heart rate
Low blood pressure
Enlarged organs. When something becomes enlarged or BIGGER than normal the word often ends in -megaly.
Hepatomegaly -enlarged liver, splenomegaly - enlarged spleen, or both hepatosplenomegaly. When these organs become enlarged it may cause pain in the right upper quadrant of the abdomen.


== Complications from malaria ==
Complications are problems that happen because of a disease.
Pregnant women and young children have more complications. People who get malaria for the first time have more complications. Falciparum malaria has the most complications.


== Diagnosis ==


=== Clinical diagnosis ===
A clinical diagnosis is based on the signs and symptoms of a disease, it is a diagnosis made without medical testing. In the case of malaria one of the main symptoms which may lead to a clinical diagnosis of malaria is a fever.
Any clinical diagnosis of malaria should be confirmed by a trained professional based upon laboratory results as soon as it is possible.


=== Malaria rapid diagnostic test ===
A Malaria rapid diagnostic test is a blood test which can confirm a diagnosis of malaria in about twenty minutes. RDTs are not foolproof and have a number of drawbacks, and as such a negative rapid diagnostic test should not be accepted at face-value and follow-up with malaria microscopy is necessary.


=== Malaria microscopy ===
To see if patients have malaria, doctors may do a blood test. This test is called a Giemsa blood smear. Blood is put on a slide which is a thin piece of glass. The Giemsa stain is put on the slide. This stain helps doctors see the malaria. Then they look at the slide under a microscope. The Plasmodium is seen in the red blood cells.


== Treatment ==

People with different kinds of malaria need different medicines. The medicine that works for one kind of malaria may not for another kind. So it is very important to know which species of Plasmodium the person has.
If the species is not known, the person should be given medicine and care like they have falciparum malaria – the worst kind.
It is also important to know where the person got malaria. Plasmodium in some places is resistant to some medicines. So the medicines to treat malaria in Africa are different from the medicines to treat malaria from South America.


=== Treatment of malaria other than falciparum ===
Everywhere except New Guinea, the treatment is the same. In New Guinea most P. vivax is resistant to chloroquine. It can be treated with quinine, but this medicine can make people sick. Everywhere else, non-falciparum malaria is treated with chloroquine.
Chloroquine kills the Plasmodium in the blood. But the Plasmodium in the liver is not killed by chloroquine. P. vivax and P. ovale both stay in the liver a long time. This is the dormant phase. Another medicine must be given with chloroquine for P. vivax and P. ovale. This is to kill the Plasmodium in the liver. The medicine used to kill malaria in the liver is primaquine. In southeast Asia, some P. vivax is resistant to primaquine. Most other places, primaquine works very well.
Some people get very sick from primaquine. So people have to be tested to see if they have G6PD-deficiency before they take primaquine.


=== Treatment of falciparum malaria ===
Falciparum is the worst kind of malaria. People with falciparum malaria should be treated in a hospital if they are:
Very sick
Children
Pregnant
Having malaria for the first time
Not able to take medicines by mouth
Even people who are treated with medicines at home should stay with the doctor for 8 hours. This is to make sure they do not get sicker.It also makes sure they can take the medicines by mouth. Malaria does not start to become a life-threatning disease until it has been a couple of weeks after the bite without being treated.
Falciparum malaria also has more resistance to medicines. This makes it much harder to treat. Falciparum malaria is always treated with two or more medicines. Doctors choose the medicines by where in the world the person got malaria. Different places have P. falciparum that is resistant to different medicines.
The most important resistance is chloroquine-resistance. In some places in the world, P. falciparum is killed by chloroquine. In some places it is chloroquine-resistant. This means chloroquine does not kill it. In these places quinine can be used. Quinine is taken by mouth.


== How to prevent malaria ==

There are three ways to prevent malaria:
Control mosquitoes
Keep mosquitoes from biting
Take medicine to keep from getting sick after a bite, especially in those parts of the world where people get malaria.


=== Control mosquitoes ===

Vector control is one way to stop malaria. Vector means an organism that carries an infectious disease to another organism. For malaria, the vector is the Anopheles mosquito.
The most used method of vector control is pesticides. These are chemicals that kill the mosquito. The first pesticide used for vector control was DDT. DDT worked very well for vector control. It killed mosquitoes. It did not make people very sick at the time it was used. It did not cost very much money. Other chemicals for vector control had not been invented yet.
In many places mosquitoes became resistant to DDT. This meant that DDT did not work anymore in these areas. Scientists worried that DDT was making people and animals sick. It killed a lot of wildlife too. DDT also stays in the environment for a long time. For these reasons, people mostly use other chemicals for vector control. Organophosphate or carbonate pesticides are used, like malathion or bendiocarb.
Vector control is not the only way to stop malaria. And DDT is not the only chemical that can be used for vector control. The best way to stop malaria is to use a combination of methods. In some places, DDT may be a useful part of a program to stop malaria. This is why DDT is still allowed to be used for controlling malaria.


=== Keeping mosquitoes from biting ===
The mosquito that carries malaria comes more at dawn (when the sun comes up) and dusk (when the sun goes down.) Be most careful at these times. Wear long trousers and shirts with long sleeves. Wear mosquitoes repellent (this is a chemical that mosquitoes do not like, so they do not bite.) Mosquitoes will bite through thin cloth. So repellent should be used on skin and clothes.
Pesticides can be used in rooms to kill mosquitoes. When sleeping outside, people use a mosquito net. This is made from cloth that air can go through but keeps mosquitoes out. It is put over a bed where people sleep to keep mosquitoes out. Sometimes people also use it when they are not sleeping. It is best to use mosquito nets that have been treated with Permethrin, which repels and kills mosquitoes.


=== Taking medicine to not get sick ===
People can take medicine when they are in a place where there is malaria. This reduces the chances that they contract malaria. This is called prophylaxis.
Some people take prophylactic medicines for years. Many people in areas where there is malaria do not have the money to buy this medicine.
People who live where there is no malaria usually have not had malaria. The first case malaria is usually much worse. So people from places where there is no malaria may take prophylactic medicines when they go to places where there is malaria. The kind of prophylactic medicines people take depends on where they are. This is because not all medicines work on the malaria in every place.
To make them work best, prophylactic medicines have to be taken the right way. The medicine should start before going to an area with malaria. Most medicines should be taken for 4 weeks after coming home. One medicine (Malarone) only needs to be used for one week after coming home.


== Resistance to malaria ==
There are some children in Tanzania who are naturally immune to malaria. Researchers are using this to develop a new vaccine. U.S. researchers have found the children produce an antibody which attacks the malaria-causing parasite. Injecting a form of this antibody into mice protected the animals from the disease. The researchers plan to do tests on primates, including humans.


== History ==

It was Britain's Sir Ronald Ross, working in the Presidency General Hospital in Calcutta, who finally proved in 1898 that malaria is transmitted by mosquitoes. He did this by showing that certain mosquito species transmit malaria to birds. He isolated malaria parasites from the salivary glands of mosquitoes that had fed on infected birds. For this work, Ross received the 1902 Nobel Prize in Medicine. After resigning from the Indian Medical Service, Ross worked at the newly established Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine and directed malaria-control efforts in Egypt, Panama, Greece and Mauritius. The findings of Finlay and Ross were later confirmed by a medical board headed by Walter Reed in 1900. Its recommendations were used during construction of the Panama Canal. This public-health work saved the lives of thousands of workers and helped develop the methods used in future public-health campaigns against the disease.
The first effective treatment for malaria came from the bark of cinchona tree, which contains quinine. This tree grows on the slopes of the Andes, mainly in Peru. The indigenous peoples of Peru made a tincture of cinchona to control malaria. The Jesuits noted the efficacy of the practice and introduced the treatment to Europe during the 1640s, where it was rapidly accepted. It was not until 1820 that the active ingredient, quinine, was extracted from the bark, isolated and named by French chemists.
In the early 20th century, before antibiotics became available, Julius Wagner-Jauregg discovered that patients with syphilis could be treated by intentionally infecting them with malaria. The resulting fever would kill the syphilis spirochaetes, and quinine could be administered to control the malaria. Although some patients died from malaria, this was preferable to the almost-certain death from syphilis.
Malaria was the largest hazard encountered by U.S. troops in the South Pacific during World War II, where about 500,000 men were infected. Sixty thousand American soldiers died of malaria during the North African and South Pacific campaigns.


== Other websites ==
Video: Life Cycle of Malaria Parasite in the Mosquito
WHO malaria information
US Centers for Disease Control: Malaria
Medline Plus about malaria


== References ==The mandible is a bone found in all jawed vertebrates. The name comes from Latin mandibula.
In bony fish the lower jaw is made of a number of bones, but these were gradually reduced in evolution.
In humans and other mammals the mandible is simply the jawbone or dentary, which is the largest and strongest bone of the face.
In mammals bones formerly in the lower jaw have become the ear ossicles.Marasmus is a form of malnutrition. It happens in people (especially children) who do not get enough food. A healthy person gets energy from eating food, especially foods with protein and fat in them. Because a person with marasmus is not getting enough food, they do not get the energy they need to survive.
Children with marasmus look emaciated (very skinny). This is because their bodies have burned up all of their fat and muscles to make energy. The child's body weight will be less than 60% of a normal child his or her age.
Marasmus can be treated. However, about half of children with bad malnutrition die because they cannot get treatment where they live.
The word “marasmus” comes from the Greek word μαρασμός marasmos (meaning "decay").


== Signs and symptoms ==
Most children with marasmus look shrunken and have lost most of their muscles and body fat. Their bodies try to save as much energy as possible by shutting down the immune system, not growing, and giving less energy to the liver, kidneys, heart, and gastrointestinal system. This can cause problems like:
Having too much fluid in the body, because the kidneys are not working well enough to get rid of it. This can lead toedema (fluid under the skin) and even heart failure.
Hypothermia (low body temperature), because staying warm takes energy, and because the child has almost no fat or muscles to keep them warm
Hypoglycemia (low blood sugar), because the child is not getting sugar or carbohydrates from foods
Infection, because the child's body has shut down the immune system, which usually fights infection, to save energy
Other symptoms of marasmus include:
Anemia (not having enough red blood cells in the blood)
Dehydration, not having enough water in the body
Shock caused by dehydration (hypovolemic shock)
Tachypnea (breathing too fast - for example, from pneumonia or heart failure)

Eye problems
Skin problems
Problems with the ears, nose, and throat (like ear infections)


== Causes ==
Marasmus is caused by a deficiency (not having enough) of nearly all nutrients, especially protein, carbohydrates, and lipids (fats).


== Treatment ==
Marasmus can be treated by giving emergency nutrients and fluids. However, treating the causes of marasmus is not enough. Often, the disease has complications (it causes other problems), like infections, dehydration, and problems with the circulatory system. These complications are very dangerous and often kill children if they are not treated correctly.


== Related pages ==
Malnutrition
Starvation
Kwashiorkor (a similar disease caused by not having enough protein)


== References ==The medial collateral ligament (often known as the tibial collateral ligament, or abbreviated to MCL) is one of the four major ligaments of the knee.


== Other websites ==
The KNEEguru – an educational site with much knee content with sections on medial collateral ligament injuriesMelanocytes are melanin-producing cells. They are most obvious in the skin, hair and eyes. They are in the bottom layer of the skin's epidermis, in hairs, and in the iris of the eye, and some places inside the body.
Melanin is the pigment mostly responsible for skin and hair colour. It protects the skin against damage by UV radiation from the Sun. UV radiation causes damage to cell DNA, which makes skin cancer more likely.
Melanocyte-stimulating hormones (MSH) from the pituitary gland causes melanocytes to produce more melanin. They stimulate the production and release of melanin by melanocytes in skin and hair. MSH signals to the brain have effects on appetite and sexual arousal.


== References ==Melanoma (pronounced /ˌmɛləˈnoʊmə/) is a malignant tumor of melanocytes which are found predominantly in skin but also in the bowel and the eye (see uveal melanoma). It is one of the rarer types of skin cancer but causes the majority of skin cancer related deaths. Malignant melanoma is a serious type of skin cancer. It is due to uncontrolled growth of pigment cells, called melanocytes. According to a report by the WHO, about 48,000 people die of melanoma every year. Melanoma is prominent in New Zealand and Australia due to the hole in the ozone layer and the many beaches.
Melanoma that has metastasised (spread beyond the initial primary tumor) is treated with Dacarbizine or Interleukin-2, also known as Proleukin, in many cases. Interleukin-2 has a response rate of up to sixteen-percent. Recent studies support the use of a new drug called Ipilimumab, which appears to prolong survival in metastatic melanoma patients. Percutaneous liver perfusion with a chemotherapeutic agent known as melphalan can prolong progression free survival in patients with melanoma metastatic to the liver, although the majority of patients in this study had melanoma starting in the eye rather than the skin.


== References ==Menstrual migraine (also called catamenial migraine) is term used to describe both true menstrual migraines and menstrually related migraines. About 7%-14% of women have migraines only at the time of menstruation, these are called true menstrual migraines. Most female migraneurs experience migraine attacks throughout the menstruation cycle with an increased number perimenstrually, these are referred to as menstrually related or menstrually triggered migraine.
It used to believed that treatments for migraine would work in menstrual migraine but that has not proven to be the case because menstrual migraines are harder to treat. Because of this, menstrual migraines are now considered a separate medical disorder from migraine. In 2008, menstrual migraines were given ICD-9 codes (346.4-346.43) of their own which separate menstrual migraine from other types of migraine.
About 40% of women and 20% of men will get a migraine at sometime in their life; most of them will get their first migraine before they are 35-years-old. Menstrual-related migraines happen in more than 50 percent of women who have migraine headaches.
Menstrual migraine attacks usually last longer than other migraine attacks, [Pinkerman and Holroyd, 2010] and short-term treatments do not work as well with menstrual migraine as they do in other kinds of migraine. They are usually migraines without aura, but in 2012 a case of menstrual migraine with aura was reported, so it is possible. Auras are a kind of condition which affect certain parts of the brain, usually the parts that control vision but they can also affect the parts of the brain which control the other senses like touch, motor control (moving parts of the body) and the parts of the brain that control speech.


== Symptoms ==


=== Warning symptoms ===

Warning symptoms also called prodrome symptoms often happen before a migraine attack.
Sleepiness
Fatigue
Depression (feeling sad), euphoria (feeling very happy) or irritability
Restlessness
Excessive (too much) yawning
Food cravings especially for sweet or salty foods or loss of appetite
Increased thirst
Diarrhea
Nausea
Bloating: the body retains (keeps) too much water
Neck stiffness
Talkativeness (talking too much)
Feeling light-headed
Uterine pain and cramping


=== Headache symptoms ===
A pounding throbbing headache with the pain being on one side of the head (unilateral). The side of the head that has the pain changes from one headache to the next.


== Diagnosis ==

The diagnosis of a menstrual migraine is made by keeping track of when the migraines occur for a period of at least three months. Menstrually related migraine attacks occur usually between 2 days before and 3 days after the start of menstruation in at least 2 out of 3 menstrual cycles (periods) in a row. Pure menstrual migraine and menstrually related migraine are both migraines without auras with one exceptionnally rare case with aura reported in 2012.
The Menstrual Migraine Assesment Tool (MMAT) is a simple questionaire with three questions, that has shown to be fairly accurate in diagnosing menstrual migraine (Tepper SJ, 2008). The three questions are:
Do migraines occur in the space of time 2 days before the beginning of a woman's period, until the third day after the start of the period. And does this happen in most months.
Do headaches that happen during this time become very severe.
Does the woman experience photophobia which is when a medical problem cause light to bothers a person's eyes.
The answer to the first question has to be yes and there has to be at least one yes answer to either question 2 or question 3.
In order to keep track of what time of the month the migraines happen it is helpful to use a headache diary. A person uses the headache diary to write down information about their headaches, like when they started, what kind of symptoms they had and how bad the pain was etc.


== Comorbidities ==

Often, having one medical condition makes it more likely a person will also have one or more other medical or psychiatric disorders. These other disorders are the "comorbid disorders" or "comorbidities". There are various comorbid medical and psychiatric conditions associated with migraines. The treatment and prognosis (if a disease gets better, worse or stays the same over time) of migraine is affected by the comorbid disorders which may be present and/or the chance of getting comorbid disorders.
Asthma
Premenstrual asthma (PMA): is when asthma symptoms get worse during the premenstrual period. This condition may affect up to 40% of female asthma sufferers. For a diagnosis of PMA to be made it is necessary to have a detailed history of the timing of menstrual cycles along with asthma symptoms experienced, and the peak expiratory flow rate (PMA may cause the PEF to be lowered in the premenstrual period). It is helpful in making a diagnosis to keep a diary of symptoms and peak expiratory flow (PEF) rates.

Raynaud’s disease: is a circulatory disorder in which the smaller arteries that supply blood to the extremities - most often the hands, but it may also affect the, toes, the tip of the nose and the ears - become narrower reducing blood flow. This causes the extremities to become numb and to be cooler than the core body temperature. It can be triggered by exposure to stress and cold.
Epilepsy
Fibromyalgia
Comorbid psychiatric conditions
Major depressive disorder
Anxiety
Bipolar disorder


== Prevention ==

There are treatments which are used for menstrual migraines which may in some cases reduce how many times a woman gets them and how bad they are. This kind of treatment is called prophylactic therapy and it is used in the perimenstrual period which is the time between periods.
Prophylactic therapy for menstrual migraine should be tried for at least 3 menstruation cycles to see if that kind of treatment works before it is stopped. Medications used may include:
NSAIDS (nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs):
1. Napraxen sodium such as Aleve
Beta blockers — such as propranolol, nadolol, atenolol, and metoprolol
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) and other kinds of antidepressant medications are often used for migraine prevention. These include amitriptyline, nortriptyline, and doxepin.


== Treatment ==
Acute treatments (short-term treatment) include drugs called Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS) (drugs that help stop inflammation which is redness, swelling, pain, tenderness, heat in parts of the body), triptans such as Frovatriptan, ergotomines which are a kind of drug made from a fungus called ergot, and estrogen transdermal patches, which are patches worn on the skin that have estrogen in them which enters the body through the skin and then into the bloodstream.


== Causes ==
The exact causes of menstrual migraine are not known for sure but there is a link between falling levels of the female hormone estrogen and the onset of a migraine attack. The estrogen level may fall after bleeding occurs during the menstrual cycle or when external sources of estrogen are no longer taken, like when a woman stops taking birth control pills or hormone pills in hormone replacement therapy.


== Other websites ==
Optimizing Management of Menstrual Migraine [5]


== Sources ==Mental confusion (often simply called confusion) is a symptom. People suffering from it have problems finding their way around in the world. They have troubles remembering who they are, where they are, or what time (or day of the week) it is. Additionally, they may have trouble remembering things or memorizing new things. This may be linked to problems focusing their attention. Confusion can also be a sign of someone being sick with various illnesses when it's coupled with things like fever, chills, or exhaustion.


== Medical causes of confusion ==
Confusion can be caused by many different medical problems.
There are both acute and chronic causes of confusion.


=== Acute causes of confusion ===
Acute causes of confusion usually come on suddenly, and doctors may be able to fix some of them.
In medicine, the acronym AEIOU-TIPS is used to remember the most common causes of confusion that comes on suddenly (over hours or days, not years):
Alcohol (being drunk) or Acidosis (having too much acid in the blood, which poisons the body)
Environmental causes (like being very cold) or Epilepsy (being confused after a seizure)
Infection (like meningitis, an infection of the brain's lining)
Overdose (taking too much medicine or too many illegal drugs)
Uremia (poisons building up in the blood because of kidney problems) or Underdose (not taking enough prescribed medicine)
Trauma (injury, especially to the head)
Insulin (confusion because of a blood sugar emergency - blood sugar is either too low or much too high)
Psychogenic (when mental illness causes confusion)
Stroke (when not enough blood and oxygen gets part of the brain)
Confusion can also happen when the brain is not getting enough blood and oxygen. For example, this can happen because of:
Low blood pressure (when the heart is not pumping hard enough to get blood and oxygen to the brain)
If the heart is beating too slow, or too fast, or not regularly (making the heart unable to get blood and oxygen up to the brain)
A breathing problem that makes it impossible to get enough oxygen into the body (like a bad asthma attack, or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD))


=== Chronic causes of confusion ===
Chronic causes of confusion usually come on less suddenly and last for a long time (months or years). For example:
Dementia or Alzheimer's disease can cause a person to be confused most of the time, or all of the time
Traumatic brain injury, or any other kind of damage to the brain
A brain tumor


== References ==The mesencephalon or midbrain is a part of the brain stem. It is associated with vision, hearing, motor control, sleep/wake, arousal (alertness), and temperature regulation.
In the anatomy of developing animals, the brain forms from the neural tube, which turns into three vesicles. The mesencephalon (midbrain) is the middle vesicle, and becomes part of the brain stem.
The mesencephalon is ancient in origin, meaning its general architecture is shared with the most ancient of vertebrates. Dopamine produced in the substantia nigra plays a role in motivation and habituation of species from humans to insects.


== References ==The metatarsus or metatarsal bones are a group of five long bones in the foot. They are between the tarsal bones of the hind and mid-foot and the phalanges of the toes.
The metatarsal bones are numbered from the side of the large toe: the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth metatarsal. They can be numbered with Roman numerals. The metatarsals are like the metacarpal bones of the hand.
The metatarsal bones are often broken by soccer players. This may be caused by the lightweight design of modern football boots, which give less protection to the foot. In 2010 some soccer players began testing a new sock that had a rubber silicon pad over the foot to protect the top of the foot.


== References ==A migraine is a medical condition which usually causes a pounding, throbbing headache on one side of the head. The pain may be very bad and hurt so much that a person may have a hard time doing anything. While most people who have migraines get a headache, not everyone does. There are different kinds of migraines and some do not cause a headache but do have other symptoms.
Most migraines cause a headache and nausea and might make the person dizzy or very sensitive to bright lights or loud noises. Some people have "auras" before a migraine starts, which means their ability to see becomes different. They may see funny patterns, have blurry vision, or may not be able to see at all. Other senses can change before or during a migraine, and the person may sense funny smells or tastes. Migraines can last a long time. Most migraines only last about 4 hours. Some can last up to 72 hours.
Migraines have been classified, based on how often they happen in a month: If a person has a headache for less than fifteen days, the migraine is called episodic migraine (EM). If it happens more than fifteen days, it is called chronic migraine (CM). Chronic means it happens over a long amount of time. Some people who start off getting episodic migraines may start to get chronic migraines later. Chronic migraine then may revert or go back to episodic migraine.
The exact causes of migraines are not known for sure. People used to believe that the main cause of migraines were unusual things in the blood vessels in the brain. However, now people believe that migraines start with a problem in the central nervous system. When this problem is triggered by various factors it sets off a cascade of neurological and biochemical reactions. Among these are reactions that disturb the trigeminal nerve. This nerve is the largest nerve in the head (cranial nerve) and the blood vessels (vascular system) which supply blood to the brain.
There are different risk factors which make a person more likely to have migraines. Being a female is a risk factor, and so is having family members who had migraines. For a person who has migraines, there are different trigger factors which may set off a migraine attack. In a large group of females who have migraines, one of the main trigger factors is when the amount of the hormone estrogen in their body either drops too low or fluctuates (goes up and down).
The World Health Organization says that migraine headache is the most costly brain problem for treatment and disability in the European Union and the United States.


== Types ==


=== Migraine with aura ===
Acephalgic migraine also called a silent migraine is a kind of migraine with aura but without the head pain. This type of migraine usually starts sometime during middle-age, which is after a person is 40 years old, and becomes more common as a person gets older. Unlike other migraines, males have acephalgic migraines more often then females do.
Basilar-type migraine is a type of migraine with aura that causes headache usually in the occipital region of the brain with neurological symptoms that is believed to come from the brainstem, occipital cortex, and cerebellum and/or affects both hemispheres of the brain at the same time. Most people who have basilar-type migraine also experience migraines with aura without the basilar symptoms. This type of migraine usually more common in people under age 20 and young females.
Familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) is a type of migraine with aura that also may cause paralysis on one side of the body. When the migraine stops, the person can move normally again.
Retinal migraine has repeated times of vision loss in one eye, that may happen before or during a headache. People who have retinal migraines usually have a history of having one of the other more common types of migraine.


=== Migraine without aura ===
Menstrual migraine or catamenial migraine is a type of migraine that happens perimenstrually, which means around the time of menstruation during a woman's monthly menstrual cycle. Menstrual migraine is usually a migraine without aura, but sometimes a menstrual migraine with aura happens. About 7%-14% of women have migraines exclusively at the time of menstruation. These are considered true menstrual migraines. Most female migraneurs experience migraine attacks at all times during the menstrual cycle, with an increased number perimenstrually. These are referred to as menstrually related or menstrually triggered migraine. Both true menstrual migraines and menstrually related migraines are categorized under menstrual migraine.The role of estrogen

Estrogen is a hormone that is mostly made in a woman's ovaries. There are three types of estrogen: estrone, estradiol and estriol.In women who have migraines it is usually connected with their menstruation cycle. About 60% of women have these menstrual or menstrually-related migraines and the main trigger is believed to be reduced circulating estrogen levels, i.e. the amount of estrogen in the body, specifically estradiol. In some cases, fluctuation (going up and down) in the amount of circulating estrogen levels may trigger a migraine, i.e. not only too little but sometimes too much estrogen may trigger a migraine.


=== Childhood periodic syndromes ===

Childhood periodic syndromes are a group of migraine syndromes that children may have. When a child has one of these child periodic syndromes there is a greater chance that they will get one of the other, more common types of migraines when they are adults.
Abdominal migraine is a kind of migraine which causes a very bad pain in the area of the abdomen, usually around the 'belly-button' which is called the periumbilical area. Abdominal migraine usually affects children starting at about age 7, but it may affect younger children and older children, and it may also sometimes affect adults.
Benign paroxysmal vertigo of childhood (BPVC for short): (this means harmless dizziness, that happens again and again and happens suddenly) is a medical condition which occurs in children usually starting between two and five years of age; it often disappears by the age of eight. BPVC causes vertigo.
Cyclic vomiting syndrome or cyclical vomiting syndrome( CVS), is a medical condition whose main symptoms are nausea and repeated vomiting. CVS happens more often in children but it can occur at any age.


=== Chronic vs. episodic migraine ===

Episodic migraine (EM) is when a person has migraine symptoms for 14 days or less in one month, while chronic migraine (CM) is when a person has migraine symptoms for 15 or more days in one month. When compared to persons with episodic migraine those with CM where less likely to have full-time jobs and had a larger risk of headache-related disability.Persons with CM are almost twice as likely to have anxiety, chronic pain, and/or depression; they also have a 40% greater chance of having heart disease and angina and are 70% more likely to have a history of stroke.
About 7.68% of total migraine cases are chronic migraines and about 1% of people in the United States have CM, with a higher rate among females, middle-aged people, and in those households that had the lowest annual income. (The American Migraine Prevalence and Prevention Study)


== Aura ==

Aura (from the Greek word for breeze) is the word used to describe a series of neurological symptoms that may begin before an epileptic seizure or a migraine headache. About 15% of people who have a migraine will have the kind with an aura. The symptoms may include visual problems such as scotomas (losing vision for a short time, seeing zig-zag lines or floating spots etc.), vertigo, a ringing noise in the ears (tinnitus) and problems speaking.

Scotoma (came from the Greek word for darkness: skotos): a blind spot or area of reduced vision surrounded by a normal visual field. i.e.: A person can see normally except where the scotoma is.Scotomas may affect one or both eyes and be either and be either absolute where nothing can be seen within the scotoma or, relative with some ability to see within the area of the scotoma.
Scotomas may also have different patterns and shapes like the fortification scotoma; it is called fortification because it looks like the outline of an old fort. Scotomas can start of small and then get bigger, move around to different parts of a person's visual field, and they can also look like flickering lights. 


== Risk factors and triggers ==

In medicine a factor is a substance, a condition or an activity, or a lack thereof that increases the chance of a certain outcome or condition happening. If it increases the chance of something unhealthy it is a risk factor. A trigger factor or 'trigger' for short is a factor that may cause an activity or the signs and/or symptoms of a medical condition to begin.
Risk factors
Gender: Women are three times more likely to have migraine headaches than men.
Family history: A person has more of a chance of getting migraines if one of their parents has had them. The International Headache Consortium are doctors from a lot of different countries who study headaches and what causes them. They have found four genetic variations - these are differences in a persons genes - that are risk factors for migraine without aura in people who have these differences. Two of these genetic variations had already been shown to play a role in migraine with aura.
Hormonal changes
Obesity: has shown to be a risk factor for chronic migraine not episodic migraine.
Triggers
Dietary habits: fasting, dehydration, or skipping meals.
Diet: Eating certain foods such as those that contain tyramine which is found in certain foods and is the end result of the natural breakdown of the amino acid tyrosine. Various food contain tyramine such as aged cheeses, smoked fish, some kinds of beer. Tyramine as a trigger for migraine is thought to effect less than 10% of people with migraines.


== Diagnosis ==

There are no specific tests to diagnose migraine but a doctor may use different tests to rule out other causes for a person's symptoms. The diagnosis of migraine is a clinical diagnosis which means it is based upon a person's medical history that a person reports to the doctor.The medical history for a possible migraine diagnosis which can be called the headache history includes information such as:
Does anyone else in the person's family have medical problems. If so what kind?
What are all the symptoms you have?
At what age did the symptoms first start?
How often do the headaches and/or other symptoms occur?
How long do the symptoms last?
Where is the pain? Unilateral: either left or right side of the head - bilateral: both left and right sides


=== Differential diagnoses ===
Differential diagnoses are different medical disorders which may cause the same symptoms. Before a doctor makes a final diagnosis, which means they are sure of what medical disorder is causing the problem, they think of what other medical conditions have the same or almost the same symptoms, and make sure it's not one of them.
Brain tumor
Cluster headache
Sinusitis
Stroke
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Tension headache
Vascular pathologies: medical conditions that effect the vascular system such as arteriovenous malformation


== Disorders that often occur with migraine ==

Often, having one medical condition makes it more likely a person will also have one or more other medical or psychiatric disorders. These other disorders are the "comorbid disorders" or "comorbidities". There are various comorbid medical and psychiatric conditions associated with migraines. The treatment and prognosis (if a disease gets better, worse or stays the same over time) of migraine is affected by the comorbid disorders which may be present and/or the chance of getting comorbid disorders.
Asthma

Raynaud’s disease: is a circulatory disorder in which the smaller arteries that supply blood to the extremities - most often the hands, but it may also affect the, toes, the tip of the nose and the ears - become narrower reducing blood flow. This causes the extremities to become numb and to be cooler than the core body temperature. It can be triggered by exposure to stress and cold.
Epilepsy
Fibromyalgia
Comorbid psychiatric conditions
Major depressive disorder
Anxiety
Bipolar disorder


== Complications of migraine ==
In medicine, a complication is a problem that happens because of, a procedure (like surgery), treatment (like medication), or illness (like migraines).
Chronic migraine
Status migrainosus is the term used to describe a severe migraine attack which lasts more than 72 hours straight.
Persistent aura without stroke
Migraine stroke
Migraine-triggered seizures


== Epidemiology ==

In medicine epidemiology is the study of what causes diseases and medical conditions, how often they happen, where they happen and who they happen to.
Migraine is more common among boys than girls until the beginning of puberty when girls start getting migraines more often than boys. By the later part of the teenage years girls get migraines almost twice as much as boys do. The amount of people who get migraines is highest between the ages of 25 to 55 years in both men and women, after which, the risk of getting migraines get lower as a person gets older.
Between 65-75% of adult migraine sufferers are women and of these women, about two-thirds have menstrual migraines. Migraines are more common in people who make less money, there may be different reasons why such as stress.
About two-thirds of migraines are migraines without aura and the remaining one-third of cases are migraine with aura.


== History ==
Symptoms that mimic those of migraines have been recorded in various cultures throughout written history. The first known mention was found on cuneiform tablets from Babylonia dating to 2000-1880 B.C.E.A treatment for migraine can be found in the Ebers Papyrus, an Ancient Egyptian medical text named after George Ebers, the German Eygptologist who discovered them. In the ancient text dated to 1552 B.C.E. migraine is refereed to as "suffering in half the head". 
The Ancient Greek physician Aretaeus of Cappadocia's description of a type of headache he dubbed heterocrania is considered a description of migraine.


== References ==Motor neurone disease (sometimes called Lou Gehrig’s disease or Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) is a chronic, progressive, almost always fatal neurological disease.
These are the nerve cells which move muscles when we speak, walk, swallow, and move our body. These diseases get worse with time. They cause increasing disability and, eventually, death. There is no known cure. It is marked by slow but steady death of the nerve cells in the central nervous system that control voluntary muscle movement. That is, people can no longer move, but their heart still beats.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the most common of the five types of motor neuron disease. About 5 to 10% of cases are directly inherited from a person's parents.
The disorder causes muscle weakness and muscle shrinking (atrophy) throughout the body. Both the upper motor neurons and the lower motor neurons die, making them stop sending messages to the muscles. Unable to function, the muscles gradually weaken and waste away (atrophy). Eventually, the ability of the brain to start and control voluntary movement is lost. However, even patients in later stages of the disease may still have the same intelligence, memory, and personality they had before it started.


== Symptoms ==
Motor neurone disease does not show many symptoms, making it very hard to diagnose. It usually affects people ages 40-60. The earliest symptoms may include twitching, cramping, or stiffness of muscles; muscle weakness affecting an arm or a leg; slurred and strange-sounding nasal speech; or having a difficult time chewing or swallowing. These general symptoms then develop into clear weakness or atrophy that may cause a physician to believe that a person has ALS.
The parts of the body affected by early symptoms of ALS depend on which muscles in the body are affected first. About 75% of people have limb onset ALS. In some of these cases, symptoms first affect one of the legs, and patients have awkwardness when walking or running or they notice that they are tripping or stumbling more often. Other limb onset patients first see the effects of the disease on a hand or arm as they have a difficult time with simple tasks requiring hand dexterity, or ability to move small things, such as buttoning a shirt, writing, or turning a key in a lock.
About 25% of cases are bulbar onset ALS. These patients first have difficulty speaking clearly. Speech becomes hard to understand and slurred. Speaking through the nose and softer talking are often the first symptoms. Difficulty swallowing, and loss of tongue movement follow. Eventually total loss of speech and ability to keep the airway clear when swallowing are experienced.


== Treatment ==
There is no cure for ALS. However, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has approved the first drug treatment for the disease: Riluzole (Rilutek). Riluzole is believed to reduce damage to motor neurons. Clinical trials with ALS patients showed that riluzole gives a better chance of survival by several months, mainly in those with a hard time swallowing. The drug also allows more time before a patient needs breathing help. Riluzole does not heal the damage already done to motor neurons. However, this first ALS therapy offers some hope that ALS may one day be slowed by medications.
Other treatments for ALS are designed to make symptoms less painful and improve the quality of life for patients.


== References ==Murine Typhus is a disease spread by fleas. It is also called endemic typhus. It is a type of typhus. Sometimes this disease is mistaken for a viral infection because the symptoms are similar. Murine Typhus is treated with antibiotics.
Symptoms are:
fever
headache
muscle pain
nausea
vomiting
coughing
Most people recover fully but death can occur in the elderly.


== Other pages ==
Epidemic typhus


== References ==The Myelodysplastic syndrome is a group of diseases and conditions that affect how blood is made. These diseases were formerly known as preleukemia, mostly because sometimes they can lead to leukemia. Often, its name is shortened to MDS.
Myelodysplastic syndromes affect the bone marrow stem cells. The production of blood does not rely on good stem cells, but ones that have been modified genetically. This means that the production of red blood cells, sometimes of white blood cells and blood platelets changed. The production becomes inefficient, or goes wrong altogether. Most of the time, this manifests in anemia - not having enough blood. Depending on the severity of the condition, it can also cause hemorrhages and infections with fever.
Most of the people who have these conditions are 60 years or older, but younger people can get it too, especially if they went through a form of chemotherapy. Most of the suffers die from the disease, usually after six to thirty months. The only known cure is a stem cell transplant. About a third of those suffering contract leukemia within a few months to a few years.An acute myocardial infarction, also called a heart attack, happens when a blood vessel in the heart suddenly becomes blocked. Blood vessels carry blood and oxygen. When a blood vessel in the heart gets blocked, blood cannot get to part of the heart. This part of the heart does not get enough oxygen. This is called ischemia. When the heart muscle becomes ischemic (does not get enough blood and oxygen), the ischemia often causes chest pain. This is called angina pectoris. If the ischemia lasts long enough, the heart muscle that is not getting enough oxygen dies. This is called an infarction. "Myocardial infarction" means "infarction (muscle death) in the heart muscle."
A heart attack is a medical emergency. The first few minutes are very important for keeping the person alive. Some of the damage from the heart attack can be repaired if the person gets treatment during the first hour of the attack.


== Causes ==
Most heart attacks are caused by coronary artery disease (CAD). In coronary artery disease, a wax-like material called plaque builds up on the inside walls of arteries in the heart. This is called atherosclerosis. Plaque is made of cholesterol and other cells. The amount of plaque increases slowly. As more plaque builds up, the insides of the heart's blood vessels get narrower. This means that less blood can flow through the blood vessels. This can cause platelets (which make the blood clot) to build up in front of the plaque. This causes a blood clot in the blood vessel. If the clot breaks free and gets stuck in part of the blood vessel made narrower by the plaque, the plaque and the clot together block the blood vessel completely. This makes it impossible for blood to get to part of the heart, and causes a heart attack.
A person can lower their chances of getting coronary artery disease by eating healthy foods, exercising, not smoking cigarettes, and not drinking too much alcohol.[source?]


== Symptoms ==

Signs that a person is having a heart attack show over several minutes, and rarely come immediately. Most people having a heart attack have chest pain. Sometimes, people also have pain in the left arm, the lower jaw, the neck, the right arm, the back, or in parts of the abdomen.
Many women have different symptoms than men. The most common symptoms include shortness of breath (trouble breathing), weakness, and feeling very tired. Some women feel tired, do not sleep properly, and have shortness of breath for up to a month before they have a heart attack. Women may also have nausea and stomach upset when having a heart attack.
Sometimes, people have "silent heart attacks." These are heart attacks that do not cause any pain. They are more common in elderly people, women, and people with diabetes. In these people, suddenly feeling very tired, or fainting, may be the only sign of a heart attack.


== Treatment ==

A heart attack is a medical emergency that needs treatment as quickly as possible. The most important thing is to save as much myocardium (heart muscle) as possible and prevent more complications. As time passes, the risk of damage to the heart muscle increases.
Doctors or paramedics usually start certain treatments as soon as a heart attack is suspected. These treatments include:
Aspirin. Aspirin is an early and important treatment for a heart attack. Aspirin keeps platelets from sticking together, and can help prevent more blood clots from forming inside the blood vessels and the heart.
Nitroglycerin (nitro). Nitro widens the blood vessels in the heart. This makes it easier for blood to flow through those vessels to the heart.
Oxygen (if needed). If the patient is having trouble breathing, oxygen can be given.
Pain medicine for chest pain (if needed).
Once doctors are sure that a person is having a heart attack, there are two main treatments: "clot-busting medicines" (thrombolytics) and percutaneous coronary intervention.


=== "Clot Busters" ===
"Clot-busting medicines" (called thrombolytics) can dissolve blood clots that are blocking the blood vessels in the heart. This makes it possible for blood and oxygen to flow again to the part of the heart that was not getting enough blood and oxygen. The most common clot-busting medicine is called tissue plasminogen activator (tPA).
Clot-busters work best if patients get them within 30 minutes after getting to the hospital. However, if a patient gets a clot-busting medicine within 12 hours after the heart attack starts, they have a better chance of surviving.
Clot-busting medicines do have some risks. Sometimes they can thin the blood too much and cause bleeding.


=== Percutaneous coronary intervention ===
Percutaneous coronary intervention is a way of opening blocked coronary arteries. Percutaneous means that the procedure is not done by cutting a person open in surgery. Coronary intervention means "way to help the heart". Percutaneous coronary intervention is also called "coronary angioplasty".
In a percutaneous coronary intervention, a doctor threads a flexible tube into one of the patient's blood vessels, usually one in the upper thigh. The doctor threads the tube up to the blocked blood vessels in the heart. On the end of the tube is a balloon. The doctor blows up the balloon, which pushes the plaque and blood clot against the side of the blocked blood vessel. This allows blood to flow through that blood vessel again. Sometimes, a doctor might also place a small mesh tube called a stent into the blood vessel. The stent will make sure the blood vessel stays open and does not get blocked again in the future.


=== First Aid ===

As soon as a person thinks they may be having signs of a heart attack, they should call emergency service right away. (Emergency services can be reached dialling 911 in the US, and 112 in most of continental Europe) However, the average person waits about three hours before asking for help. When a person waits to get help, they are more likely to have more serious damage to their heart. The American Heart Association says "time is muscle": the more time a person waits to get treatment, the more heart muscle dies.
If a person is having trouble breathing, sitting straight up can help. The person should follow any instructions they get from the emergency operator or their doctor.


== References ==The nasal cavity (or nasal fossa) is a large air filled space above and behind the nose in the middle of the face.


== Function ==
The nose cavity is divided into a right and left passageway. The tissue that covers the wall of your nasal cavity contains many blood vessels. Heat from the blood in the vessels helps warm the air as you breathe. Moisture (small amounts of water) is added to the air you breath by special cells in the walls of the nasal cavity. The air is warmed and moistened before it reaches your lungs. Cilia (small hairs) and mucus along the inside wall of the nasal cavity trap and remove dust and germs from the air as it flows through the nasal cavity. The cilia move the mucus down the nasal cavity to the pharynx, where it can be swallowed.


== Location ==
The nasal cavity is covered by the nasal bone. The top of the inside of the mouth separates the nasal cavity from the mouth. The nasal cavity is divided in two by a vertical fin called the nasal septum. On the sides of the nasal cavity are three horizontal outgrowths called turbinates. These turbinates guide the air through the nasal cavity. The vomeronasal organ is found at the back of the septum and has a role in finding pheromones.


== Diseases ==
Diseases of the nasal cavity include viral infections and nasal cavity cancer. Picking your nose can lead to bloody noses as well.


== Other websites ==
Gross anatomy dissection of the nasal cavity, video [1] and [2]Nose-picking is the act of sticking a finger into the nose and digging inside. It is a taboo subject in most countries. It is considered to be very gross and disgusting despite being a very common habit. Nose-picking can also cause nose bleeds. Some people also eat boogers, which can be even more disgusting. If someone is seen picking their nose, it can be very embarrassing.


== Other websites ==
BBC home: The Truth About Nose-picking
Toddlers and Nose Picking
Adams, Cecil (1982-08-20). "Can you die from picking your nose?". The Straight Dope. http://www.straightdope.com/classics/a1_270b.html. Retrieved 2008-12-18.
Ilori, Kemi (2007-06-19). "Nose Picking: The interesting and funny habit". The Daily Sun. http://www.sunnewsonline.com/webpages/features/goodhealth/2007/june/19/goodhealth-19-06-2007-004.htm. Retrieved 2008-12-18.
"Man dies from picking his nose". The Daily Telegraph. 2008-12-05. http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/3566273/Man-dies-from-picking-his-nose.html. Retrieved 2008-12-18.
(In fact) Nose-picking favorite occupation of the Dutch (March 2007) (Dutch) Translated version
Another article on same topic (August 2008) (Dutch) Translated version
For an elaborate spoof, see "Nose-picking in the Pongidae and Its Implication for Human Evolution", said to be from the American Journal of Nasal Anatomy, (1987)The optic tectum is a major part of the midbrain of vertebrates. In vertebrates such as fish, reptiles and birds, it is the main visual processor of the brain.
In mammals, however, most of the work is done in the visual cortex. This is at the back of the cerebral cortex. The tectum does preliminary visual processing, and controls eye movement. When human anatomy textbooks use the term superior colliculus they are referring to the tectum. The diagram is based on human anatomy.


== Mechanism ==
Each layer of the tectum contains a topographic map of the surrounding world. If neurons at a point in the map fire, it starts a response towards the corresponding point in space. In primates, the tectum ("superior colliculus") directs eye movements. Visual input from the retina, or "command" input from the cerebral cortex, create a "bump" of activity in the tectal map. If strong enough, this causes an eye movement.
In primates, the tectum is also involved in generating head turns, arm-reaching movements, and shifts in attention which do not involve any movements. In other species, the tectum is involved in a wide range of responses, including whole-body turns in walking rats, swimming fishes, or flying birds; tongue-strikes toward prey in frogs; fang-strikes in snakes, etc.
In some non-mammal species, including fish and birds, the tectum is one of the largest components of the brain. In mammals, and especially primates, the massive expansion of the cerebral cortex reduces the tectum ("superior colliculus") to a much smaller fraction of the whole brain. It still is the main integrating centre for eye movements.


== References ==Oral cancer is cancer of any part of the mouth. It can start in the mouth, lips, or the oropharynx (the part of the throat at the back of the mouth).
A person can get oral cancer without having any other type of cancer. However, oral cancer can also happen because of metastasis. This means that the person had cancer in some other part of their body, and it spread to the mouth. The person's cancer may be far away from the mouth, or it may be in a part of the body that neighbors the mouth. For example, if a person has cancer of the nasal cavity, the cancer can spread to the mouth.


== Types of Oral Cancers ==
There are a few different types of oral cancers. But about 90% (9 in every 10 cases) are a type called squamous cell carcinomas. Squamous cells make up the main part of the outer layer of the skin. These cells line the lips, mouth, and throat. A "carcinoma" is a type of cancer that can start in these cells in the skin.
Squamous cell carcinomas most often start in the tongue. But they can also start in any other part of the mouth, including the floor of the mouth (under the tongue); the inside lining of the cheek; the gums; the lips; or the palate (the roof of the mouth).
Other oral cancers include:
Adenocarcinoma, which starts in a salivary gland
Lymphoma, which can start in the tonsils
Melanoma, which can start from cells in the mucus membrane that lines the inside of the mouth


== References ==The ossicles are the three smallest bones in the human body. They may be called ear bones or auditory ossicles. They are in the auditory system of all mammals.
They are contained within the middle ear space and serve to transmit sounds from the air to the fluid-filled labyrinth (cochlea). The absence of the auditory ossicles would cause moderate-to-severe deafness.


== Anatomy ==
The ossicles are, in order from the eardrum to the inner ear (from superficial to deep), the malleus, incus, and stapes. The terms mean hammer, anvil, and stirrup.
The malleus (hammer) connects with the incus and is attached to the tympanic membrane (eardrum), from which vibrational sound pressure motion is passed.
The incus (anvil) is connected to both the other bones.
The stapes (stirrup) connects with the incus and is attached to the membrane of the fenestra ovalis, the elliptical or oval window or opening between the middle ear and the inner ear.


== Development ==
Studies have shown that ear bones in mammal embryos are attached to the dentary, which is part of the lower jaw. These are ossified (turned into bone) portions of cartilage -- called Meckel's cartilage -- that are attached to the jaw. As the embryo develops, the cartilage hardens to form bone. Later in development, the bone structure breaks loose from the jaw and migrates to the inner ear area. The structure is known as the middle ear, and is made up of the incus, stapes, malleus, and tympanic membrane. These correspond to the quadrate, prearticular, articular, and angular structures in earlier land vertebrates.


== References ==Ovaries (Singular: Ovary) are organs found in female organisms. Ovaries are part of the reproductive system needed to reproduce sexually.
Most vertebrates have ovaries. Usually animals have two ovaries. Birds usually have only one working ovary; snakes have one ovary in front of the other. The ovaries are similar to testicles in men.


== Anatomy ==
Ovaries are shaped like eggs and are around 3 cm by 1.5 cm by 1.5 cm. The ovary is found in the side walls of the pelvis.
Each ovary is attached to the Fallopian tube. Usually each ovary takes turns releasing eggs every month.


== Uses ==
Ovaries have two purposes:
Produce female sex hormones resulting in puberty
Produce ova (also called "egg cells"), which are the female reproductive cells.


== Menstruation ==

During menstruation, an ovum is released from the ovary to be fertilised. Ovaries have a certain number of eggs in them, so when eggs stop being released, this is the start of the menopause. During this time, female hormones stop being produced.


== Related pages ==
Menopause
Ovum
Cervix
Vagina


== Other websites ==
Merck Online Medical Library: Female Reproductive SystemAn Overdose is when someone takes too much of a certain drug. This may be done voluntarily (as an attempt of suicide) or involuntarily. The drug may be a drug taken to treat some medical condition, or it may be a drug taken for recreation. Overdoses are considered to be poisoning, usually. They may lead to death, depending on the drug used.


== What to do with people who had an overdose ==
If someone is thought to have had an overdose it is important to get them to a doctor, or hospital. It can be very hard to see what kind of drug was taken. Therefore, it can be hard for the doctor to find an antidote to give. For this reason, a packet (even if it is empty) of the drug should be taken.
Act as described in Medical emergency, call an ambulance.
In addition, the person who has taken the overdose needs to be kept from the effects of the drug. In the case of pills that act like sleeping pills, he or she must be kept from falling asleep or unconscious. In the case of pills that act like stimulants, he or she must be calmed down, moved to a calm environment.The palate is the roof of the mouth in humans and other mammals. It separates the oral cavity (mouth) from the nasal cavity.
A similar structure is found in crocodilia, but, in most other tetrapods, the oral and nasal cavities are not truly separate.
The palate is divided into two parts, the anterior bony hard palate, and the posterior fleshy soft palate or velum. 
The hard palate is formed before birth. If the fusion is not complete, it is called a cleft palate. This is a birth or congenital defect.
As the roof of the mouth was once considered the seat of the sense of taste, palate can also refer to this sense itself, as in the phrase "a discriminating palate". By further extension, the flavour of a food (particularly beer or wine) may be called its palate.


== References ==Pallor (also known as paleness) is when the skin is a pale color. It can be caused by illness, stress or even shock.
Pallor is seen most easily on the face and palms. It can develop suddenly or slowly.
Causes of pallor may include migraines, headache, hypoglycemia, anemia or scarlet fever.


== References ==The parasympathetic nervous system (PNS or PSNS) is part of the autonomic nervous system. It does the opposite things of the sympathetic nervous system, the other part of the autonomic nervous system. This way, the parasympathetic and sympathetic nervous systems balance each other's effects. The sympathetic nervous system helps a person "fight or flight" when they are in danger. When the danger is gone, the parasympathetic nervous system lets the person "rest and digest," "feed and breed."


== Effects ==
The parasympathetic nervous system has many different effects. It affects every part of the body, including:
The heart: The heart relaxes and beats slower. This makes the heart rate and blood pressure lower.
The lungs: Breathing slows down. The bronchi (the tubes that bring air to the lungs) also get narrower.
The eyes: The pupils get smaller.
The digestive system: Extra blood is sent to the stomach and intestines. The stomach and intestines also work faster. This helps the person digest the food in their stomach.
The blood vessels: The blood vessels in the parts of the body that are far away from the heart, lungs, and brain get wider. (This is called vasodilation.) This helps make the blood pressure lower. It also makes the skin warmer, and can cause a man to have an erection.
Because of these effects, the parasympathetic nervous system always has to balance with the sympathetic nervous system. For example, if only the parasympathetic nervous system was working, a person's heart rate and breathing would keep getting lower and lower. Eventually the person would stop breathing or their heart would stop beating.
However, in a healthy person, the brain realizes when the parasympathetic nervous system's effects are getting too strong. For example, the brain may realize that the person is breathing too slowly, or that their heart rate is too low. The brain reacts by making the sympathetic nervous system kick in. Because the sympathetic nervous system has the opposite effects, it will make the person breathe faster and raise their heart rate. These two systems have to balance each other constantly for a person to stay healthy.


== Control ==
The parasympathetic nervous system is controlled mostly by the vagus nerve. This is an important nerve that comes from the brain and goes all the way down to the bottom of the spinal cord. The vagus nerve sends out chemical messengers called neurotransmitters - mostly one called acetylcholine. This chemical causes changes in many different parts of the body.


== Related pages ==
Autonomic nervous system
Sympathetic nervous system
Enteric nervous system


== References ==The parietal lobe is a part of the brain positioned above the occipital lobe and behind the frontal lobe.
The parietal lobe brings together information from different senses, particularly spatial sense and navigation. For example, it uses input about touch, balance and the visual system. This enables the parietal cortex to map seen objects in relation to the body (into 'body coordinate positions'). This makes it possible for a person to reach out and handle objects.
The name derives from the overlying parietal bone, which is named from the Latin pariet-, = 'wall'.Penile cancer is cancer of the penis. It is relatively rare in developed countries. In developing countries, however, it is much more common. It can be dangerous.


== References ==The Perineum is the area of the human body found between the lower end of the vagina and the anus (in females); and the scrotum and the anus (in males). When a person reaches puberty, the size of the perineum is about one inch in length. During puberty, hair will grow around and on the perineum to protect it.
Inside the perineum-area are specialized muscles that perform functions of sexuality, erection and excretion.Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a genetic disorder (a disease a person is born with) where a person's body cannot break down an amino acid called phenylalanine. Amino acids are necessary to make proteins, an important part of the human body. Phenylalanine only comes from the food we eat; our bodies do not make any by themselves.


== How it works ==
Average people produce an enzyme called phenylalanine hydroxylase in their bodies. When they ingest phenylalanine, the body cannot use it, so this enzyme changes phenylalanine into tyrosine, which the body can use. In people with PKU, very little or no enzyme is made. Since the phenylalanine they eat is not being changed into tyrosine, it builds up in their bodies. This can cause problems with the way their bodies work.


== Symptoms ==
Symptoms vary from person to person. Because of the rarity of PKU, many symptoms go undiagnosed or unrecognized. In addition, there are variations in the categories of PKU individuals. There are untreated, early treated, late treated, those returning to diet, Hyperphe, Classical PKU, uncontrolled, and highly controlled. For your average infant a doctor will diagnose PKU with a quick blood test. Their symptom will be high PHE levels. If that infant goes undiagnosed for weeks or months, he/she may start to exhibit some or all of the following symptoms for uncontrolled PKU. The symptoms include:
focus/concentration problems
seizures
lowered intelligence
tremors
problems with memory
gait (walking) problems
anxiety
skin problems
depression
mousy odor
aggression
irritability
phobias
mental fog
slower thinking and response
hyperactivity
lethargy
social anxiety
decreased motor function and hand/eye coordination
fatigue
psychotic symptoms
mild paralysis
autistic behaviors
social withdrawals
lack of autonomy
social maturity deficits
decreased positive emotions
low self-esteem


== Treatment ==
Today, scientists know what foods have phenylalanine in them, and they have created a special diet for people with PKU. Since they cannot use it, people with PKU cannot eat foods that have a lot of phenylalanine, like eggs, meat and milk. An artificial sweetener called aspartame is also a source of phenylalanine. People with PKU take a lot of vitamins to make up for the foods they cannot eat, especially vitamins B6 and B12.
Babies with PKU are fed a special formula. It has everything babies need to stay healthy, but with very little phenylalanine. There are also low protein foods like breads and flour (Made from corn and starch instead of regular wheat).
Women with PKU who are pregnant or trying to get pregnant have to be especially careful to follow this diet. If they do not follow the diet, their babies could be born with severe birth defects and mental retardation. Babies born to women with PKU who have followed the PKU diet throughout their pregnancy are usually healthy and do not necessarily but may develop PKU. Whether or not they have PKU themselves depends on the mother and father's genes. In fact there are people who are Carriers (Dormant Genes) that can be passed on until they resurface in the future generations. These are so far undetectable, However since PKU is genetically recessive it takes PKU genes from both parents to cause PKU.
PKU kids usually have light hair and eyes due to the effect of phenylalanine in the production of melanin. They also tend to have very fair skin which can cause them to burn easily. Solar protection is a must for those who wish to work, play, or engage in activities outdoors.


== Future ==
Most people with PKU can live as long and healthy as anyone else if the low-phenylalanine diet is started when they are babies and continued for the rest of their lives. The symptoms will usually disappear after the diet is started.


== Other websites ==
Phenylketonuria at the Open Directory ProjectPhysical abuse is a form of abuse which causes feelings of pain, injury, or other physical suffering. Physical abuse may lead to low self-esteem and other mental problems.


== Types of physical abuse ==
Physical abuse has many forms. A few examples of physical abuse are:
Striking or hitting
Punching
Pushing or pulling
Slapping
Whipping
Striking with an object
Pinching
Kicking
Strangling
Drowning
Sleep deprivation
Freezing
Burning
Electric shock
Cutting
Exposure to a dangerous animal
Poisoning
Withholding food or medication
Assault
Humiliation
Neglect
BitingPica (/ˈpaɪkə/ PY-kə) is an eating disorder where a person wants to eat things that are not normal to eat, for example nails, rocks or feces. A person with pica may also have a strong want to eat unusual things that are normally considered food but not in the normal way, for example, uncooked potatoes, flour or starch. It is common in small children.Pituitary adenomas are tumors that occur in the pituitary gland. Pituitary tumors are generally divided into three kinds dependant upon their biological functioning: benign adenoma, invasive adenoma or carcinomas, with carcinomas accounting for 0.1% to 0.2%, appoximately 35% being invasive adenomas and most being benign adenomas. Pituitary adenomas represent from 10% to 25% of all brain tumors and is thought to happen in about 17% to 25% of most people.
Non-invasive and non-secreting pituitary adenomas are considered to be benign [harmless]; but a recent large study (Fernández-Balsells, et al. 2011) has shown there are few studies to prove if this is true or not.
Adenomas that are bigger than 10 millimetres (0.39 in) are called macroadenomas, and those smaller than 10 mm are called microadenomas. Most pituitary adenomas are microadenomas. Most pituitary microadenomas often remain undiagnosed and those that are diagnosed are often found as an incidental finding [which means found by chance], and are called incidentalomas.
Invasive adenomas may invade the dura mater, cranial bone, or sphenoid bone. It used to be thought that clinically active pituitary adenomas were rare but recent studies have suggested that they may affect about one in 1000 of the general population.


== References ==Pneumonia is a disease of the lungs and the respiratory system. The lung contains many small bulbs, or sacs, called alveoli. These help to take out oxygen from the air. In the case of pneumonia, these bulbs become inflamed. They fill up with a fluid, and can no longer absorb as much oxygen as before.


== Background ==
Pneumonia can be caused by bacteria, viruses, fungi or parasites. It can also be caused by chemical or physical damage done to the lungs. Other illnesses, like alcohol abuse or lung cancer, can also result in pneumonia.
People with pneumonia usually have difficulty breathing. They may also cough, or have pains in the chest area. The treatment of pneumonia depends on how the illness was caused. If it was caused by bacteria, antibiotics can be used to treat it.
People of all ages can have pneumonia. The disease is dangerous. Many people die from pneumonia, especially old people, or people with a weak immune system.
Pneumonia kills more children under the age of five than any other disease, claiming a young life every 20 seconds.


== Other types of pneumonia ==

Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
SARS is a highly contagious and deadly type of pneumonia which first occurred in 2002 after initial outbreaks in China. SARS is caused by the SARS coronavirus, a pathogen (disease-causing organism) that was not known until then. New cases of SARS have not been seen since June 2003.
Bronchiolitis obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP)
BOOP is caused by inflammation (swelling or irritation) of the small airways of the lungs. It is also known as cryptogenic organizing pneumonitis (COP).
Eosinophilic pneumonia
Eosinophilic pneumonia is invasion of the lung by eosinophils. Eosinophils are a particular kind of white blood cells. Eosinophilic pneumonia often occurs in response to infection with a parasite or after exposure to certain types of environmental factors.
Chemical pneumonia
Chemical pneumonia (usually called chemical pneumonitis) is caused by chemical toxins such as pesticides, which may enter the body by inhalation (breathing in) or by skin contact. When the toxic (poisonous or harmful) substance is an oil, the pneumonia may be called lipoid pneumonia.
Aspiration pneumonia
Aspiration pneumonia (or aspiration pneumonitis) is caused by getting oral (mouth) or gastric (stomach) contents into the lungs, either while eating, or after reflux or vomiting. The lung inflammation from these materials is not an infection but can cause one, since the material taken into the lungs may contain bacteria. Aspiration is a common cause of death among hospital and nursing home patients, since they often cannot cough hard enough to protect their airways.


== References ==


== Other websites ==
Merck Manual: Pneumonia
Merck Manual of Geriatrics: Pneumonia in the elderly
British Lung FoundationThe prefrontal cortex (PFC) is the front part of the frontal lobes of the brain. It lies in front of the motor and premotor areas.
This brain region helps plan complex cognitive behaviours, personality expression, and decision making. It helps correct social behaviour. The basic activity of this brain region is to bring together thoughts and actions to help achieve internal goals.
The most typical psychological term for functions carried out by the prefrontal cortex area is executive function. This is the ability to work out conflicting thoughts. It determines good and bad, better and best, same and different, consequences of current activities, working toward a goal, prediction of outcomes, and expectation of results. Critical is 'social control': the ability to suppress urges which, if not suppressed, could lead to socially unacceptable outcomes.
Many authors have indicated an integral link between a person's personality and the functions of the prefrontal cortex.


== References ==Primary central nervous system lymphoma is a form of Lymphoma affecting the Central nervous system. It is more common in those with weak immune systems, such as those with AIDS.Progeria (pronunciation: /proʊˈdʒɪəriə/), also called Hutchinson–Gilford progeria syndrome and HGPS progeria syndrome is a very rare genetic disorder. Children born with progeria show symptoms which are like aging. This can include skin wrinkles and grey hair or baldness. Progeria is one of several progeroid syndromes. The word progeria comes from the Greek words "pro" (πρό), meaning "before" or "premature", and "gēras" (γῆρας), meaning "old age".
It is very rare, only 1 child in every 8 million live births. People with progeria usually only live to their mid teens to early twenties. It is a genetic condition that occurs as a new mutation. It is rarely inherited, as people with the condition do not usually live long enough to have children.
Scientists are studying progeria because it might reveal clues about the normal process of aging. Progeria was first described in 1886 by Jonathan Hutchinson. It was also described independently in 1897 by Hastings Gilford. The condition was later named Hutchinson–Gilford progeria syndrome.


== References ==The prosencephalon (or forebrain), the mesencephalon (midbrain), and rhombencephalon (hindbrain) are the three primary portions of the brain of vertebrates. They develop very early during development of the central nervous system.
When the embryonic prosencephalon fails to divide the brain into two lobes, it results in a condition known as holoprosencephaly.


== Other websites ==
Sylvius: 400+ structure neuroanatomical visual glossary; used by over half of U.S. medical schools
High-Resolution Cytoarchitectural Primate Brain AtlasesProstatitis is any form of inflammation of the prostate gland. Because women do not have a prostate gland, it is a condition only found in men, although women do have microscopic paraurethral Skene's glands connected to the distal third of the urethra in the prevaginal space that are homologous to the prostate, and may cause symptoms.
A prostatitis diagnosis is assigned at 8% of all urologist and 1% of all primary care physician visits in the USA.


== Nomenclature ==
The term prostatitis refers in its strictest sense to histological (microscopic) inflammation of the tissue of the prostate gland, although historically the term has loosely been used as a rubric to describe a set of quite different conditions. To try to remedy this, the NIH devised a new classification system in 1999.


== Classification ==
According to the 1999 National Institute of Health (NIH) Classification, there are four categories of prostatitis:
Category I: Acute prostatitis (bacterial)
Category II: Chronic bacterial prostatitis
Category III: Chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome (CP/CPPS), Pelvic Myoneuropathy

Subdivisions of IIIa (inflammatory) and IIIb (non-inflammatory) exist based on levels of pus cells in expressed prostatic secretions, but these subcategories are of limited use clinically

Category IV: Asymptomatic inflammatory prostatitis


== Category I: Acute prostatitis (bacterial) ==


=== Signs and symptoms ===
Men with this disease often have chills, fever, pain in the lower back and genital area, urinary frequency and urgency often at night, burning or painful urination, body aches, and a demonstrable infection of the urinary tract, as evidenced by white blood cells and bacteria in the urine. There may be discharge from the penis.


=== Diagnosis ===
Acute prostatitis is relatively easy to diagnose due to its symptoms that suggest infection. Common bacteria are E. Coli, Klebsiella, Proteus, Pseudomonas, Enterobacter, Enterococcus, Serratia, and Staphylococcus aureus. This can be a medical emergency in some patients and hospitalization with intravenous antibiotics may be required. A full blood count reveals increased white blood cells. Sepsis from prostatitis is very rare, but may occur in immunocompromised patients; high fever and malaise generally prompt blood cultures, which are often positive in sepsis.


=== Treatment ===
Antibiotics are the first line of treatment in acute prostatitis (Cat. I). Antibiotics usually resolve acute prostatitis infections in a very short period of time. Appropriate antibiotics should be used, based on the microbe causing the infection. Some antibiotics have very poor penetration of the prostatic capsule, others, such as Ciprofloxacin, Co-trimoxazole and tetracyclines penetrate well. Severely ill patients may need hospitalization, while nontoxic patients can be treated at home with bed rest, analgesics, stool softeners, and hydration.


=== Prognosis ===
Full recovery without sequelae is usual.


== Category II: Chronic bacterial prostatitis ==


=== Signs and symptoms ===
Chronic bacterial prostatitis is a relatively rare condition (<5% of patients with prostate-related non-BPH LUTS) that usually presents with an intermittent UTI-type picture and that is defined as recurrent urinary tract infections in men originating from a chronic infection in the prostate. Dr. Weidner, Professor of Medicine, Department of Urology, University of Giessen, has stated: "In studies of 656 men, we seldom found chronic bacterial prostatitis. It is truly a rare disease. Most of those were E-coli." Symptoms may be completely absent until there is also bladder infection, and the most troublesome problem is usually recurrent cystitis.


=== Diagnosis ===
In chronic bacterial prostatitis there are bacteria in the prostate but usually no symptoms. The prostate infection is diagnosed by culturing urine as well as prostate fluid (expressed prostatic secretions or EPS) which are obtained by the doctor doing a rectal exam and putting pressure on the prostate. If no fluid is recovered after this prostatic massage, a post massage urine should also contain any prostatic bacteria. Prostate specific antigen levels may be elevated, although there is no malignancy.


=== Treatment ===
Treatment requires prolonged courses (4–8 weeks) of antibiotics that penetrate the prostate well (β-lactams and nitrofurantoin are ineffective). These include quinolones (ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin), sulfas (Bactrim, Septra) and macrolides (erythromycin, clarithromycin). Persistent infections may be helped in 80% of patients by the use of alpha blockers (tamsulosin (Flomax), alfuzosin), or long term low dose antibiotic therapy. Recurrent infections may be caused by inefficient urination (benign prostatic hypertrophy, neurogenic bladder), prostatic stones or a structural abnormality that acts as a reservoir for infection.
The addition of prostate massage to courses of antibiotics was previously proposed as being beneficial. It is though not without some risk, and has not been shown in more recent trials to improve outcome compared to antibiotics alone.


=== Prognosis ===
Over time, the relapse rate is high, exceeding 50%.


== Category III: CP/CPPS, pelvic myoneuropathy ==


=== Signs and symptoms ===
In chronic prostatitis/chronic pelvic pain syndrome (CP/CPPS) there is pelvic pain of unknown cause, lasting longer than 6 months, as the key symptom. Symptoms may wax and wane. Pain can range from mild discomfort to debilitating. Pain may radiate to back and rectum, making sitting difficult. Dysuria, arthralgia, myalgia, unexplained fatigue, abdominal pain, constant burning pain in the penis, and frequency may all be present. Frequent urination and increased urgency may suggest interstitial cystitis (inflammation centred in bladder rather than prostate). Ejaculation may be painful, as the prostate contracts during emission of semen, although nerve- and muscle-mediated post-ejaculatory pain is more common, and a classic sign of CP/CPPS. Some patients report low libido, sexual dysfunction and erectile difficulties. Pain after ejaculation is a very specific complaint that distinguishes CP/CPPS from men with BPH or normal men.


=== Theories of Etiology ===
Theories behind the disease include autoimmunity, for which there is scant evidence, neurogenic inflammation and myofascial pain syndrome. In the latter two categories, dysregulation of the local nervous system due to past traumatic experiences or an anxious disposition and chronic albeit unconscious pelvic tensing lead to inflammation that is mediated by substances released by nerve cells (such as substance P). The prostate (and other areas of the genitourinary tract: bladder, urethra, testicles) can become inflamed by the action of the chronically activated pelvic nerves on the mast cells at the end of the nerve pathways. Similar stress-induced genitourinary inflammation has been shown experimentally in other mammals.
Prostatitis researcher Dr Anthony Schaeffer commented in a 2003 editorial of The Journal of Urology that: "It is well recognized that even if pathogenic bacteria are present in the prostate, as in men with established chronic bacterial prostatitis, they do not cause chronic pelvic pain unless acute urinary tract infection develops. Taken together, these data suggest that bacteria do not have a significant role in the development of the chronic pelvic pain syndrome. The clinical observation that antimicrobial therapy reduces symptomatology in men with chronic pelvic pain syndrome is being tested in a double-blinded NIH controlled study. Since antimicrobials may have anti-inflammatory activity, it is possible that these drugs may benefit the patient by reducing inflammation rather than eradicating bacteria."
A year after making that statement, Dr Schaeffer and his colleagues published studies showing that antibiotics are essentially useless for CP/CPPS.
The bacterial infection theory that for so long had held sway in this field was again shown to be unimportant in another 2003 study from the University of Washington team led by Dr Lee and Professor Richard Berger. The study found that one third of both normal men and patients had equal counts of similar bacteria colonizing their prostates.
Since the publication of these studies, the focus has shifted from infection to neuromuscular and psychological etiologies for chronic prostatitis (CP/CPPS).
Possible role of unculturable bacteria in CPPS: There have been some questions regarding the role of unculturable/ultra-fastidious organisms in prostatitis. Although a team led by Keith Jarvi reported the isolation of unusual bacteria at the American Urological Association's annual meeting in 2001, it was not published in any urology journals, a sign that the paper did not withstand the peer review process. An item about the study was published in Urology Times, a newsletter for urologists. However, subsequent careful PCR studies failed to replicate these findings, and medical researchers are now in general agreement that CPPS is not caused by active bacterial infection.
Non-bacterial prostatitis as a form of interstitial cystitis (IC): Some researchers have suggested that non-bacterial prostatitis is a form of interstitial cystitis. A large multicenter prospective randomized controlled study showed that Elmiron was slightly better than placebo in treating the symptoms of chronic prostatitis. Other therapies shown more effective than Elmiron in treating interstitial cystitis, such as quercetin and Elavil (amitriptyline), can help with chronic prostatitis.


=== Diagnosis ===
There are no definitive diagnostic tests for CP/CPPS. This is a poorly understood disorder, even though it accounts for 90%-95% of prostatitis diagnoses. It is found in men of any age, with the peak onset in the early 30s. CP/CPPS may be inflammatory (category IIIa) or non-inflammatory (category IIIb). In the inflammatory form, urine, semen, and other fluids from the prostate contain pus cells (dead white blood cells or WBCs), whereas in the non-inflammatory form no pus cells are present. Recent studies have questioned the distinction between categories IIIa and IIIb, since both categories show evidence of inflammation if pus cells are ignored and other more subtle signs of inflammation, like cytokines, are measured. In 2006, Chinese researchers found that men with categories IIIa and IIIb both had significantly and similarly raised levels of anti-inflammatory cytokine TGFß1 and pro-inflammatory cytokine IFN-γ in their expressed prostatic secretions when compared with controls; therefore measurement of these cytokines could be used to diagnose category III prostatitis.
Normal men have slightly more bacteria in their semen than men with chronic prostatitis/pelvic myoneuropathy. The traditional Stamey 4-glass test is invalid for diagnosis of this disorder, and inflammation cannot be localized to any particular area of the lower GU tract.
Men with CP/CPPS are more likely than the general population to suffer from Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS), and Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS). Prostate specific antigen levels may be elevated, although there is no malignancy.
Experimental tests that could be useful in the future include tests to measure semen and prostate fluid cytokine levels. Various studies have shown increases in markers for inflammation such as elevated levels of cytokines, myeloperoxidase, and chemokines.


=== Treatment ===


==== Physical and psychological therapy ====
For chronic nonbacterial prostatitis (Cat III), also known as pelvic myoneuropathy or CP/CPPS, which makes up the majority of men diagnosed with "prostatitis", a treatment called the Stanford Protocol, developed by Stanford University Professor of Urology Rodney Anderson and psychologist David Wise in 1996, has recently been published. This is a combination of medication (using tricyclic antidepressants and benzodiazepines), psychological therapy (paradoxical relaxation, an advancement and adaptation, specifically for pelvic pain, of a type of progressive relaxation technique developed by Edmund Jacobson during the early 20th century), and physical therapy (trigger point release therapy on pelvic floor and abdominal muscles, and also yoga-type exercises with the aim of relaxing pelvic floor and abdominal muscles). While these studies are encouraging, definitive proof of efficacy would require a randomized, sham controlled, blinded study, which is not as easy to do with physical therapy as with drug therapy.
Cat. III prostatitis may have no initial trigger other than anxiety, often with an element of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder or other anxiety-spectrum problem. This is theorized to leave the pelvic area in a sensitized condition resulting in a loop of muscle tension and heightened neurological feedback (neural wind-up). Current protocols largely focus on stretches to release overtensed muscles in the pelvic or anal area (commonly referred to as trigger points), physical therapy to the area, and progressive relaxation therapy to reduce causative stress. Biofeedback physical therapy to relearn how to control pelvic floor muscles may be useful.
Aerobic exercise can help those sufferers who are not also suffering from Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (CFS) or whose symptoms are not exacerbated by exercise.


==== Food allergies ====
Anecdotal evidence suggests that food allergies and intolerances may have a role in exacerbating CP/CPPS, perhaps through mast cell mediated mechanisms. Specifically patients with gluten intolerance or celiac disease report severe symptom flares after sustained gluten ingestion. Patients may therefore find an exclusion diet helpful in lessening symptoms by identifying problem foods. Studies are lacking in this area.


==== Pharmacological treatment ====
There is a substantial list of medications used to treat this disorder.
Alpha blockers (tamsulosin, alfuzosin) are moderately helpful for many men with CPPS; duration of therapy needs to be at least 3 months.
Quercetin has shown effective in a randomized, placebo-controlled trial in chronic prostatitis using 500 mg twice a day for 4 weeks. Subsequent studies showed that quercetin, a mast cell inhibitor, reduces inflammation and oxidative stress in the prostate.
Pollen extract (Cernilton)] has also been shown effective in randomized placebo controlled trials.
Commonly used therapies that have not been properly evaluated in clinical trials are dietary modification, gabapentin, and amitriptyline. Therapies shown to be ineffective by randomized placebo/sham controlled trials: levaquin (antibiotics), alpha blockers for 6 weeks or less, transurethral needle ablation of the prostate (TUNA).
At least one study suggests that multi-modal therapy (aimed at different pathways such as inflammation and neuromuscular dysfunction simultaneously) is better long term than monotherapy.


=== Prognosis ===
In recent years the prognosis for CP/CPPS has improved greatly with the advent of multimodal treatment, phytotherapy and protocols aimed at quieting the pelvic nerves through myofascial trigger point release and anxiety control.


== Category IV: Asymptomatic inflammatory prostatitis ==


=== Signs and symptoms ===
These patients have no history of genitourinary pain complaints, but leukocytosis or bacteria have been noted during evaluation for other conditions.


=== Diagnosis ===
Diagnosis is through tests of semen, EPS or urine that reveal inflammation in the absence of symptoms.


=== Treatment ===
No treatment required. It is standard practice for men with infertility and category IV prostatitis to be given a trial of antibiotics and/or anti-inflammatories however evidence for efficacy are weak. Since signs of asymptomatic prostatic inflammation may sometimes be associated with prostate cancer, this can be addressed by tests that assess the ratio of free-to-total PSA. The results of these tests were significantly different in prostate cancer and category IV prostatitis in one study.


== References ==


== Footnotes ==


== Related pages ==
Pelvic Myoneuropathy
Quercetin (alternative medicine- a flavonoid which has anti-inflammatory properties; found in various foods)
Trigger Points
Saw Palmetto (alternative medicine- a small North American palm, used by American Indians for treating a variety of urinary and genital problems.
Interstitial cystitis - men with IC may have prostatitis, and vice versa.


== Other websites ==
ChronicProstatitis.com - a site devoted to CP/CPPS, male IC, and pelvic myoneuropathy.
Diagrams of the Pelvic Floor Muscles - muscles involved in causing prostatitis symptoms.
Mayo Clinic - prostatitis at the Mayo Clinic.
Interstitial Cystitis Network - Providing support for men with IC.The pubic bone is one of the bones that make up the pelvis. In the picture at right, it is called a pubis. It is ventral and anterior.
It is covered by a layer of fat, which is covered by the mons pubis.
It can be separated into a body, a superior ramus and an inferior ramus.
The body forms one-fifth of the acetabulum (the area around the hip socket), contributing by its outer surface both to the lunate surface and the acetabular fossa (the hip socket itself). Its inner surface enters into the formation of the wall of the lesser pelvis and gives origin to a part of the obturator internus.
In the female, the pubic bone is in front of the urethral sponge.
The left and right hip bones join at the pubic symphysis.


== More images ==


== Other websites ==
SUNY Labs 44:st-0713 - "The Male Pelvis: Hip Bone"Relapsing fever is an infection caused by some bacteria in the genus Borrelia. It is sometimes called typhinia. It is carried and spread by lice and ticks.
The word "relapse" means to come back. The disease is called "relapsing fever" because the symptoms can go away and come back several times until the person is cured.


== References ==Rete testis is a network of small tubules found in the part of the testicle that carries sperm. They can sometimes get cysts.


== Purpose ==
The rete testis have concentrated sperm and fluid in them, and they help the epididymis to absorb this fluid. If the fluid is not absorbed, the person can be infertile.


== Gallery ==


== Other websites ==
Image at UC Davis
Diagram
DiagramRetinal migraine (also known as ophthalmic migraines, or ocular migraines) is a medical condition that affects the eyes by causing vision loss in one eye for less than 1 hour, usually for about 10–20 minutes. When these retinal migraines happen they can also cause a headache, either a diffuse headache which is a headache that causes pain which is spread out and hurts a person's whole head, or, a unilateral headache, which is a headache that causes pain on one side of a persons head either, the left side or the right side.
It is believed retinal migraines are caused by vasospasms of the blood vessels of the eye in the area of the retina. The retina is at the back of the inside of the eye. In medicine a spasm is a sudden constriction or tightening of muscles that is involuntary - a person does not control them they move on their own. Muscle spasms can happen in different muscles of the body, like when a person's leg or eye twitches. The twitching is caused by the spasms.
Vaso- means something to do with the blood vessels, so a vasospasm causes the muscle cells inside the walls of a blood vessel to suddenly constrict or tighten up. This causes the whole blood vessel to constrict which means makes the blood vessel narrower. When a blood vessel constricts it is called vasoconstriction.
When vasoconstriction happens less blood the normal is able to flow through the blood vessel, like the way squeezing (constricting) a garden hose makes less water come out. Vasoconstriction can happen for different reasons including because of a medical problem.
The second part of a vasospasm -vasodilation - occurs after the vasoconstriction. After the blood vessel constricts it dilates - becomes bigger. It may return to normal size or slightly larger than normal size.
The vasoconstriction and vasodilation complete one spasm. Spasms often happen many times over and over again. It is beleved that the muscle cells tigntening and loosenening may trigger the pain of a retinal migraine.


== References ==Rheumatism or Rheumatic disorder is a general term for medical problems that can hurt the heart, bones, joints, kidney, skin and lungs. The study of these problems is called rheumatology.


== Types ==
The major rheumatic disorders that are known, some are:
Ankylosing spondylitis
Back pain
Bursitis/ Tendinitis, Shoulder pain, wrist, biceps, leg, knee (patellar), ankle, hip, and Achilles
Capsulitis
Fibromyalgia
Neck pain
Osteoarthritis
Psoriatic arthritis
Rheumatic fever
Rheumatic heart disease (a long-term complication of Rheumatic fever)
Rheumatoid arthritis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Temporal arteritis and Polymyalgia rheumatica
Tenosynovitis.


== Treatment ==
Many traditional herbal remedies were recommended for "rheumatism". Modern medicine, both conventional and complementary, shows that the different rheumatic disorders have different causes (and several of them have more than one) and need different kinds of treatment.


== Other websites ==
American College of Rheumatology
EULAR - The European League Against Rheumatism
BBC "Your Health" website on Arthritis and Rheumatism
e-medicine article on Non-Articular RheumatismThe rhombencephalon (or hindbrain) is a name for parts of the central nervous system in vertebrates.


== Additional images ==Rickets is a disease that happens in young children. It happens in children who do not get enough vitamin D and calcium. It causes larger spaces inside bones, and makes them dry, like sponges. It can make the legs curve toward each other (so the knees touch) or away from each other.
Rickets in adults is called osteomalacia.
The word "rickets" comes from the Greek word rhakhis, which means "spine."


== Cause ==
People need both vitamin D and calcium to make their bones strong.
Vitamin D helps the bones absorb (take up) calcium. Low vitamin D makes it hard to absorb calcium.
The human body makes vitamin D3 in the skin, from cholesterol. Then the liver changes vitamin D3 into calcitriol, which sends calcium from the blood into the bones. The bones need calcium to stay strong. However, the skin will not make vitamin D3 unless enough ultraviolet light shines on it. Sunlight contains ultraviolet light, so getting enough sun is one way of getting enough D3.
People need calcium for calcification. Calcification uses calcium to help make bones bigger and stronger. Low calcium makes bones delicate and easier to break.


== Prevention ==
Rickets can be prevented if a person gets plenty of calcium and vitamin D.
The best way to do this is to get a lot of sunlight, and eat foods that have a lot of vitamin D and calcium in them. However, people who cannot get enough vitamin D and calcium this way can take supplements (vitamin pills that have calcium and vitamin D in them).


=== Calcium ===
Foods that have a lot of calcium in them include:
Milk and other dairy products like cheeses
Some green vegetables, like broccoli, spinach, and kale
Today, many products are "fortified" with vitamin D: the vitamin was added when the food was made. These foods include some kinds of orange juice, breakfast cereals, breads, and even bottled water. The food's label will say how much calcium it has in it.
Calcium is absorbed best by the bones when it is taken in amounts of 500 – 600 grams or less. Because of this, doctors suggest eating smaller amounts of foods with calcium in them, at different times in the day, instead of all at once.


=== Vitamin D ===

There are three ways to get vitamin D: sunlight, foods, or supplements (vitamin pills that have vitamin D in them). However, many people cannot get enough vitamin D just from their diet.
There only a few foods that have a lot of vitamin D in them. They include:
"Fatty fish" that were caught in the wild, like mackerel, salmon, and tuna
Cooked egg yolk
Vitamin D is added to some foods, like some kinds of dairy products, cereals, and orange juices
Breast milk may not have enough vitamin D in it to prevent rickets. Babies who are only breastfed, and not fed any other foods, may be given vitamin D drops to make sure they do not get rickets. However, this is not a significant risk if mothers and child have some exposure to sunlight. Children with dark skin are more likely to need additional vitamin D.


== Risk factors ==
These things make a person more likely to get rickets:
They are between three and 36 months old. Children this age are at the greatest risk for rickets because their bones are growing so quickly, and are supposed to get bigger and stronger during this time
They were born prematurely (earlier than normal)
They live in the Northern parts of the world, where there is less sunshine
They spend too little time outside

They always wear sunscreen when going out
Even mild sunscreen decreases the amount of vitamin D the body makes by 95% (by stopping the body from taking in vitamin D from sunlight)
However, people should still wear sunscreen when they might get sunburned

They do not eat enough food that has calcium or vitamin D in it, because of lactose intolerance or a strict vegetarian diet
They cannot make or use vitamin D because of a medical disorder, like coeliac disease, or because they take certain anti-seizure medications


== Symptoms ==
Signs and symptoms of rickets include:
Brittle (easily broken) bones or teeth
Bleeding more than normal
Stunted growth (not growing like a healthy child would)
Sweating
Weakness (feeling tired all the time)
Body pain


== Related pages ==
Vitamin D
Calcium


== References ==Rosacea is a chronic facial condition that is characterized through acne and redness. It can happen to people of any age. It gets worse if left untreated. There are four types of rosacea, three involving human skin and the fourth affecting eyes.
Rosacea affects mostly Caucasians, though some other races can be affected. Rosacea affects both males and females. Females are three times more likely than males to get rosacea. Things that can cause rosacea are exposure of the face to extreme temperature, the heat of sunlight, severe sunburn, stress, anxiety, alcohol and spicy foods. Most people with rosacea have only mild redness and are never officially diagnosed or treated.


== Sources ==In humans, the sacrum is a large, triangular bone. It is at the bottom of the spine and the upper and back part of the pelvis.
It fits like a wedge between the two hip bones. Its upper part connects with the last lumbar vertebra, and bottom part with the coccyx (tailbone). During the first half of life these bones gradually fuse together.
The sacrum is concave facing forward, and tilted forward. The sacrum connects with four bones:
the last lumbar vertebra above
the coccyx (tailbone) below
the illium portion of the hip bone on either sideSalivary gland cancer is a cancer that forms in tissues of a salivary gland. The salivary glands can be called major and minor. The major salivary glands consist of the parotid, submandibular, and sublingual glands. The minor glands include small mucus-secreting glands located throughout the palate, nasal and oral cavity. Salivary gland cancer is rare, with 2% of head and neck tumors forming in the salivary glands, the majority in the parotid.


== References ==Schizoid personality disorder is a Cluster A personality disorder which involves not being interested in social relationships, tendency toward a solitary lifestyle, being secretive and being emotionally cold.
This condition is by no means the same as schizophrenia. People with SzPD will typically share some of the negative symptoms and characteristics of schizophrenia, such as blunted affect or detachment. However, schizoids do not have the positive symptoms of schizophrenia such as hallucinations.
People who have SzPD do not want interpersonal relationships which require emotion and commitment. People with SzPD are introverts who feel the need to be independent or alone. Many schizoids are asexual or have little interest in sexual encounters. Any relationships they may have likely do not involve emotional attachment. SzPD is more common in men than women.
Some of the negative symptoms of the disorder (such as low energy) may be treated with atypical antipsychotic drugs.
Theodore Millon said that there are four types of schizoid: languid, remote, depersonalized, and affectless.Schizophrenia is a medical disorder of the mind.
People with this disorder often do not behave the way most people do towards others. They also may not know what is real (this is called psychosis). Some common signs are strange beliefs, unclear or confused thinking and language, hallucinations (such as hearing voices that aren't there), poor interaction with others, less expression of feelings, and not doing much.
Diagnosis is based on observing the person and what he or she says about experiences such as hearing voices. Problems have to last for at least six months before the person is diagnosed as schizophrenic.


== Meaning ==
The word schizophrenia comes from two Greek words that mean to split and mind, because there is a 'split' between what's going on in the person's mind and what is actually happening. A person with schizophrenia does not change between different personalities: they have only one. The condition in which a person has more than one personality, meaning they act like a different person at different times, is dissociative identity disorder. There are no medical tests that can be used to say if a person has schizophrenia or not, so getting a diagnosis depends on which list of symptoms are used. It also depends on the doctor or psychologist who talks to the person. The lists of symptoms include wording like "Disorganized [not organized, or oddly organized] speech present for a significant portion of time". It is difficult to agree on what exactly "disorganized speech" is and how disorganized it has to be. It is also difficult to agree on how long a "significant portion of time" is. Because of this, two doctors or psychologists trying to make a diagnosis may often disagree. One will say that the person is schizophrenic and the other will say he or she is not. 


== Is it schizophrenia? ==
Schizophrenia has many different symptoms, and not everyone with schizophrenia has all of them. For this reason, some scientists think that schizophrenia is several separate illnesses that have some of the same symptoms. These scientists claim that the research done on schizophrenia is not accurate since different researchers mean different things when they use the word "schizophrenia" in scientific studies.
Many medications (licensed drugs to cure or treat or illness) may also cause the same symptoms as schizophrenia. The most common ones are antidepressants (medicines to treat depression) and ADHD medication (medication to treat ADHD, a condition affecting the brain, including memory and focusing on surroundings.) If a person has taken anti-vomiting medication (medication to stop them being sick) for some time and suddenly stops, he or she may get schizophrenia symptoms. Hundreds of medications have schizophrenia symptoms as rare side effects (unintended effects of taking them). Illegal drugs such as LSD, amphetamines, magic mushrooms and cocaine may cause schizophrenia symptoms. 
Medical illnesses, and treatment with certain medicines, can cause symptoms very similar to that of schizophrenia. In fact, there are over a hundred medical problems that can cause the same symptoms of schizophrenia. For this reason, it is important to rule out the possibility of either of these things being the cause for the person's symptoms. For this reason, the person should have a thorough medical exam to rule out problems like;
Not having enough vitamin B12, magnesium, sodium, or other chemicals the body needs
Sleep disorders
A stroke or brain tumor
A metabolism (chemical reactions keeping the person alive) that is too high or too low


== Delusions and hallucinations ==
People with schizophrenia often have delusions or hallucinations. A schizophrenic delusion is a belief that is very different from what other people with the same way of life believe. Hallucinations are usually experiences of hearing voices that don't exist. These voices often say unpleasant things to the person. Many people can hear voices like this without being schizophrenic, for instance right before falling asleep. This is called a hypnagogic hallucination. The brain cannot tell them apart from normal sounds that are heard. This is not yet fully understood by science.


== Risk factors ==
There are many risk factors that may cause a person to develop schizophrenia. They include trauma (damage caused by stressful events) and genetics (schizophrenia running in families). Having a schizophrenic parent may be very stressful, and there may also be genes that influence the development of schizophrenia. It is very easy to show that trauma, such as sexual abuse (forced unwanted sexual behaviour towards somebody) increases the risk, but 40 years of searching for the right genes has not found anything that has been confirmed by independent research groups. 


== Hope ==
People with schizophrenia may also have other mental health disorders, like depression, anxiety and drug abuse. They often have problems functioning in society, and have difficulty keeping a job. However, there are a number of people with schizophrenia who get well and have earned college degrees and had professional careers. For example, Elyn. R. Saks successfully became a law professor at the University of Southern California and a published author.
In a family treatment called "Open dialog" in Finland, eight out of every ten people with schizophrenia "get well." In developing countries, where doctors use less drugs, 2 out of 3 patients get well from schizophrenia. In western countries, where medications are used as treatment, 1 of 3 get well, but many suffer from drug side effects such as diabetes, obesity, and brain damage.


== Treatment ==
Treatment of schizophrenia may include medication to help treat the symptoms, different types of psychotherapy (therapy by a professional), such as cognitive-behavioral therapy and many rehabilitation therapies (therapies restoring things to how they were before), such as cognitive remediation therapy. Cognitive behavioral therapy, CBT, is a talk therapy that focuses on helping the person to think about their strange ideas (delusions) in more realistic ways.
The therapist may design a behavioral experiment for paranoia (false beliefs of danger) that will help the person to find out for example, if there really are cameras everywhere in the house. For hallucinations, cognitive therapy focuses on normalizing: many people hear voices without being stressed, and we all hear voices in the form of thoughts, it is just that people with schizophrenia hear them a bit more clearly than most people.


== Official guidelines ==
The British national guidelines for treatment (NICE) suggest the following treatments:
Check for reactions to traumatic experiences
Decide together with a doctor about using medication, taking into account the side effect risk of getting diabetes, becoming seriously overweight, getting brain damage (tardive dyskinesia, 5% risk pr year), men growing breasts, and feelings described as inner torture (akathesia).
The guidelines also warn against using more than one antipsychotic drug at the same time. Both for people who are at risk for getting schizophrenia and for people who have got it, they recommend cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and family therapy. Getting support from people who have become well from schizophrenia is also strongly recommended.  In a family oriented treatment program in Finland, Open Dialog, 8 out of 10 people with schizophrenia get well with no medication or very limited drug use, often only with anxiety medication.


== Symptoms ==

The symptoms of schizophrenia fall into three main categories: positive symptoms, negative symptoms, and cognitive symptoms.
Positive symptoms
Positive symptoms are thoughts, behaviors, or anything experienced by the senses that are not shared by others - like hearing voices that are not really there. They are called 'positive' not because they are good but because they are "added on". These symptoms may include having strange thoughts that do not make sense (delusions), disorganized thoughts and speech, and feeling, hearing, seeing, smelling, or tasting things that do not exist (hallucinations). Positive symptoms often respond to drug treatment and cognitive behavioral therapy, CBT. Stopping anti-psychotic or anti-vomiting drugs too quickly may also cause these symptoms.
Negative symptoms
Negative symptoms are thoughts, behaviors or emotions normally present in a healthy person that a person with a mental disorder has less of or may not have at all; they are 'minus' these. The sign for minus is -; it is also the sign for the word "negative". Negative symptoms includes a 'flat affect'; having a blank inexpressive look on the face and/or monosyllabic speech (speech always sounding the same) spoken in a slow monotone, few gestures, lack of interest in anything including other people, and an inability to act spontaneously or feel pleasure. These problems are also side effects of anti-psychoctic drugs. They may also be symptoms of many medical problems such as a metabolism that is too low.
Cognitive symptoms (or cognitive deficits)
Cognitive symptoms are problems with attention, certain types of memory, a the concept of time, and with the ability to plan and organize. Cognitive deficits caused by schizophrenia can also be difficult to recognize as part of the disorder. They are the most disabling of the symptoms because cognitive problems affect everyday functioning.These problems may also be side effects of anti-psychotic drugs, antidepressants, sleeping medication and anti-anxiety drugs.


== Causes ==

A combination of what has happened to a person and the person’s genes may play a role in the development of schizophrenia. People who have family members with schizophrenia and who experienced a brief period of psychotic symptoms have a 20 to 40 percent chance of being diagnosed one year later. This may be both the result of stressful events because of the family member and possibly a genetic effect. 
Inherited factors
It is difficult to know if schizophrenia is inherited because it is hard to find out whether something comes from genes or the environment. Those who have a parent, a brother or sister with schizophrenia have a higher risk of developing schizophrenia. The risk is even higher if you have an identical twin with schizophrenia. This may seem to show that schizophrenia is inherited. However, it may be the stress of living with a schizophrenic family member that is traumatic. Identical twins are much closer and are treated much more in the same way, and this may be the reason why one of them is more likely to get schizophrenia if the other has it. Dr Jay Joseph has found many problems with the scientific studies of inheriting schizophrenia, including false reporting of results. Joseph also claims that 40 years of the search for the schizophrenia gene has not found a single gene that independent research groups have confirmed.  
Environmental factors
There are may environmental risk factors factors for schizophrenia such as drug use, stress before birth and in some cases exposure to infectious diseases (a disease that spreads from person to person). In addition, living in a city during childhood or as an adult has been found to double the risk of schizophrenia . This is true even after taking into account drug use, race, and the size of one’s social group. Other factors that play an important role include whether the person feels socially isolated, as well as social adversity, racial discrimination (treating a person badly because of their race), the person's family not working properly, unemployment, and poor housing conditions. There is evidence that childhood experiences of abuse or trauma are risk factors for developing schizophrenia later in life.
Substance abuse
Several drugs have been linked with the development of schizophrenia and the abuse (harmful use) of certain drugs can cause symptoms like those of schizophrenia. About half of those people who have schizophrenia use too much drugs or alcohol, possibly to deal with depression, anxiety, boredom, or loneliness. Frequent marijuana use may double the risk of serious mental illness, including schizophrenia.
Smoking
More people with schizophrenia smoke than the general population; it is estimated that at least 60% to as many as 90% of people with schizophrenia smoke. Recent research suggests that cigarette smoking may be a risk factor for developing schizophrenia. Smoking also reduces the effects and side effects of anti-psychotic drugs, and this may be one of the reasons for the high smoking rate. Patients taking anti-psychotic drugs die up to 20 years earlier than others, possibly because the medication makes them overweight, gives diabetes and leads to them smoking.
Pre-birth factors
Factors such as lack of oxygen, infection, or stress and lack of healthy foods in the mother during pregnancy, might result in a slight increase in the risk of schizophrenia later in life. People who have schizophrenia are more likely to have been born in winter or spring (at least in the northern half of the world). This might relate to increased rates of exposures to viruses before birth. This difference is about 5 to 8 percent.
Brain structure

Some people who have schizophrenia have differences in their brain structure compared to those who do not have the disorder. These differences are often in the parts of the brain that manage memory, organization, emotions, the control of impulsive behavior, and language. For example, there is less brain volume in the frontal cortex and temporal lobes, and problems within the corpus callosum, the band of nerve fibers which connects the left side and the right side of the brain. People with schizophrenia also tend to have larger lateral and third ventricles. The ventricles are spaces within the brain filled with cerebrospinal fluid.
Brain wiring
The human brain has 100 billion neurons; each one of these neurons are connected to many other neurons. One neuron may have as many as 20,000 connections; there is between 100 trillion and 500 trillion neural connections in the adult human brain. There are many different parts or 'regions' of the brain. To complete a task - like recalling a memory - usually more than one region of the brain is involved, and they are connected by neural networks which is like the brain's wiring. It is believed that there are problems with the brain's wiring in schizophrenia.


== Diagnosis ==
The DSM-IV-TR or the ICD-10 criteria are used to determine whether a person has schizophrenia. These criteria use the self-reported experiences of the person and reported abnormalities (unusual occurrences) in the behavior of the person, followed by a clinical assessment. A person can be determined to have the disease only if the symptoms are severe.


=== Differential diagnosis ===
There are various medical conditions, other psychiatric conditions and drug abuse related reactions that may mimic the symptoms of schizophrenia (meaning they have some or all of the same symptoms). For example, delirium can cause visual hallucinations, or an unpredictable changing levels of consciousness. Schizophrenia occurs along with obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), a disorder in which a person becomes obsessed with certain ideas or actions. However, separating the obsessions of OCD from the delusions of schizophrenia can be difficult.


== Prevention ==
There is no clear evidence that treating schizophrenia with anti-psychotic drugs early is effective. The British NICE guidelines recommend cognitive behavioural talk therapy for all people at risk. In recent research, 76 patients at risk for schizophrenia were divided into two groups. One group got omega3 for 3 months and the other got a dummy pill (food oil). After 12 months only 4.9% of the omega 3 group had got schizophrenia compared to 27.5% in the other group.  There is some evidence which shows that early treatment with drugs improves short term outcomes for people who have a serious episode of mental illness. These measures show little benefit five years later. Attempting to prevent schizophrenia in the pre-onset phase with anti-psychotic drugs is of uncertain benefit and so is not recommended (as of 2009). Prevention is difficult because there is no reliable way to find out in advance who will get schizophrenia.


== Management ==

The treatment of schizophrenia is based upon the phase of the illness the person is in. There are three treatment phases:
Acute Phase
The goals of treatment during the acute phase of treatment, defined by an acute psychotic episode, are to prevent harm, control disturbed behavior, reduce the severity of psychosis and associated symptoms (e.g., agitation, aggression, negative symptoms, affective symptoms), determine and address the factors that led to the occurrence of the acute episode, effect a rapid return to the best level of functioning, develop an alliance with the patient and family, formulate short- and long-term treatment plans, and connect the patient with appropriate aftercare in the community
Stabilization Phase
During the stabilization phase, the goals of treatment are to reduce stress on the patient and provide support to minimize the likelihood of relapse, enhance the patient’s adaptation to life in the community, facilitate continued reduction in symptoms and consolidation of remission, and promote the process of recovery. If the patient has improved with a particular medication regimen, continuing to use of that regimen and monitoring are recommended for at least 6 months.
Stable Phase
The goals of treatment during the stable phase are to ensure that symptom remission or control is sustained, that the patient is maintaining or improving his or her level of functioning and quality of life, that increases in symptoms or relapses are effectively treated, and that monitoring for adverse treatment effects continues. Regular monitoring for adverse effects is recommended. For most persons with schizophrenia in the stable phase, psychosocial interventions are recommended as a useful adjunctive treatment to pharmacological treatment and may improve outcomes. Antipsychotic medications substantially reduce the risk of relapse in the stable phase of illness and are strongly recommended.


=== Medication ===

The first-line psychiatric treatment for schizophrenia is antipsychotic medication, which can reduce the positive symptoms in about seven to fourteen days. However, medication fails to improve negative symptoms or problems in thinking significantly. Many antipsychotics are Dopamine antagonists (a substance interfering with how another substance works.) High concentrations of Dopamine are thought to be the cause of hallucinations and delusions. For this reason blocking Dopamine reception helps against hallucinations and delusions.
The British national guidelines for treatment (NICE) suggest checking for reactions to traumatic experiences, deciding together with a doctor about using medication, taking into account the side effect risks of getting diabetes, becoming seriously overweight, getting brain damage (tardive dyskinesia, 5% risk per year), men growing breasts, and feelings described as inner torture (akathesia). The guidelines warn against using more than one antipsychotic drug at the same time.
Some reviews of research sponsored by the makers of antipsychotic drugs claim that about 40 to 50 percent of people have a good response to medication, 30 to 40 percent have a partial response, and 20 percent have an unsatisfactory response (after 6 weeks on two or three different drugs). Other research from The British Journal of Psychiatry were more negative and claimed that "the clinical relevance of antipsychotics is in fact limited". This study included 22 428 patients and 11 antipsychotic drugs.  A drug called clozapine is an effective treatment for people who respond poorly to other drugs, but clozapine can lower the white blood cell count in 1 to 4 percent of people who take it. This is a serious side effect.

For people who are unwilling or unable to take drugs regularly, injectable long-acting preparations of antipsychotics can be used. When used in combination with mental and social interventions (treatment), such preparations can help people to continue their treatment.


=== Psychosocial therapies ===
Numerous mental and social interventions can be useful in treating schizophrenia. Such interventions include various types of therapy, community-based treatments, supported employment, skills training, token economic interventions, and mental interventions for drug or alcohol use and weight management. Family therapy or education, which addresses the whole family system of an individual, might reduce a return of symptoms or the need for hospitalizations (having to go into hospital.) There is growing evidence for the effectiveness of cognitive behavioral therapy (also known as “talk therapy”) .
The British national guidelines for treatment (NICE) recommend for both people are at risk of getting schizophrenia and people who have got it, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and family therapy. Getting support from people who have become well from schizophrenia is also strongly recommended.  In a family oriented treatment program in Finland, Open Dialog, 8 out of 10 people with schizophrenia get well with no medication or very limited drug use, often only anxiety medication.


== Outlook ==
Schizophrenia has great human and economic costs. The condition results in a decreased life expectancy of 12 to 15 years, primarily because of its association with being overweight, not exercising, and smoking cigarettes. An increased rate of suicide (a person killing themself) plays a lesser role. These differences in life expectancy increased between the 1970s and 1990s.
Schizophrenia is a major cause of disability, with active psychosis ranked as the third-most-disabling condition. Approximately three-fourths of people with schizophrenia have an ongoing disability with symptoms that keep coming back. Some people do recover completely and others function well in society. Most people with schizophrenia live independently, with community support. In people with a first episode of serious mental symptoms, 42 percent have a good long-term outcome, 35 percent have an intermediate outcome and 27 percent have a poor outcome. Outcomes for schizophrenia appear better in the developing world than in the developed world, although that conclusion has been questioned.
The suicide rate of people who have schizophrenia is estimated to be about 4.9 percent, most often occurring in the period following the first appearance of symptoms or the first hospital admission. 20 to 40 percent try to kill themselves at least once.
Schizophrenia and smoking have shown a strong association in studies worldwide. Use of cigarettes is especially high in individuals who have schizophrenia, with estimates ranging from 80 to 90 percent of these people being regular smokers, compared to 20 percent of the general population. Those individuals who smoke tend to smoke heavily and to smoke cigarettes with a high nicotine content.
Research continues on schizophrenia. In the spring of 2013, genetics associations were shown between five major psychiatric disorders: autism, ADHD, bipolar disorder, depression, and schizophrenia per recent study. In the summer of 2013, for the first time, brain tissue development was replicated in three dimensions by scientists cloning a human "mini-brain" using stem cells. This could help with schizophrenia and autism neurological research (research related to the brain.) 


== Likelihood ==
As of 2011, schizophrenia affects around 0.3% to 0.7% of people, or 24 million people worldwide, at some point in their lives. More men are affected than women: the number of males with the disorder is 1.4 times greater than that of females. Schizophrenia usually appears earlier in men. For males the symptoms usually start from 20 to 28 years of age, and in females it is 26 to 32 years of age. Symptoms that start in childhood, middle or old age are much rarer. Despite the received wisdom that schizophrenia occurs at similar rates worldwide, its rate of likelihood varies across the world, within countries, and at the local level. The disorder causes approximately 1% of worldwide disability adjusted life years (in other words, years spent with a disability). The rate of schizophrenia varies depending on how it is defined.


== History ==

Accounts of a schizophrenia-like syndrome are rare before the 19th century. Detailed case reports from 1797 and 1809, are regarded as the earliest cases of the disorder. Schizophrenia was first described as a distinct syndrome affecting teenagers and young adults by Bénédict Morel in 1853, termed démence précoce (literally 'early dementia'). The term dementia praecox was used in 1891 by Arnold Pick in a case report of a psychotic disorder. In 1893 Emil Kraepelin introduced a new distinction in the classification of mental disorders between dementia praecox and mood disorder (termed manic depression and including both unipolar and bipolar depression). Kraepelin believed that dementia praecox was primarily a disease of the brain, and a form of dementia, different from other forms of dementia such as Alzheimer's disease which usually happen later in life.
Eugen Bleuler coined the term ”schizophrenia”, which translates roughly as "split mind", in 1908. The word was intended to describe the separation of functioning between personality, thinking, memory, and perception. Bleuler realized that the illness was not a dementia because some of his patients improved rather than got worse.
In the early 1970s, the criteria for determining schizophrenia were the subject of numerous controversies. Schizophrenia was diagnosed far more often in the United States than in Europe. This difference was partly the result of looser criteria for determining whether someone had the condition in the United States, where the DSM-II manual was used. In Europe, the ICD-9 manual was used. A 1972 study, published in the journal Science, concluded that the diagnosis of schizophrenia in the United States was often unreliable. These factors resulted in the publication of the DSM-III in 1980 with a stricter and more defined criteria for the diagnosis.


== Society and culture ==

Negative social judgment has been identified as a major obstacle in the recovery of people who have schizophrenia.
In 2002, the term for schizophrenia in Japan was changed from “Seishin-Bunretsu-Byō”　精神分裂病 (“mind-split-disease”) to “Tōgō-shitchō-shō”　統合失調症 (“integration disorder”), in an attempt to reduce feelings of shame or embarrassment. The idea that the disease is caused by multiple factors (not just one mental cause) inspired the new name. The change increased the percentage of people who were informed of the diagnosis from 37 percent to 70 percent over three years.
In the United States in 2002, the cost of schizophrenia, including direct costs (people who were not hospitalized, people who were hospitalized, medicines, and long-term care) and non-healthcare costs (law enforcement, reduced workplace productivity, and unemployment), was estimated to be $62.7 billion.
The book “A Beautiful Mind” and the film of the same name are about the life of John Forbes Nash, an American mathematician and Nobel Prize winner who has schizophrenia. The movie The Soloist is based on the life of Nathaniel Ayers, a gifted musician who dropped out of the Julliard School, in New York City after the symptoms of schizophrenia began. He later became homeless in Los Angeles, California, in the notorious Skid Row section.


== References ==The sebaceous glands are microscopic (tiny) glands in the skin which produce an oily/waxy substance, called sebum, to lubricate (oil) the skin and hair. In people, these glands are found in greatest amounts on the face and scalp, joined near the top inside hair follicles or sweat pores. However, they are in all skin areas except the palms and soles of the feet. There are different kinds of these glands and sebum. In the eyelids, meibomian sebaceous glands emit a special kind of sebum into tears. There are several related medical conditions, including: acne, sebaceous cysts, hyperplasia, sebaceous adenoma and sebaceous gland carcinoma (see section below: Diseases). Washing skin or hair with plain detergent can cut the amount of sebum in oily skin. Also, water temperature over 84 °F (29 °C) can keep sebum melted during a wash.


== Locations and morphology ==
As a branched kind of acinar gland, the sebaceous glands are found in people all over the skin except in the palms of the hands and soles of the feet.
Sebaceous glands are often found in hair-covered areas, where they are connected near the top of hair follicles (see image at top). The glands deposit sebum on each hair, and bring it to the skin surface along the hair shaft. The structure consisting of hair, hair follicle, arrector pili muscle, and sebaceous gland is known as a pilosebaceous unit.
Sebaceous glands are also found in non-haired areas (glabrous skin) of the eyelids, nose, penis, labia minora, and nipples. Here, the sebum travels along ducts which end inside sweat pores near the surface of the skin.
At the rim of the eyelids, meibomian glands are a specialized form of sebaceous gland. They secrete a form of sebum (known as meibum) onto the eye, which slows the drying of tears.


== Sebum ==
Sebaceous glands produce the oily, waxy substance called sebum (Latin, meaning fat or tallow) that is made of fat (lipids), wax, and the leftover dead fat-producing cells. In the glands, sebum is produced within specialized cells and is released as these cells burst; sebaceous glands are thus classified as holocrine glands.
Sebum has no smell, but its bacterial breakdown can produce a bad smell. Sebum is the cause of some people experiencing "oily" hair, as in hot weather or if not washed for several days. Earwax is partly composed of sebum. Sebum can be washed using plain detergent, to dissolve the waxy material in the skin. Also, water for washing should be over 84 °F (29 °C) to keep the sebum melted.
Excess sebum has been linked to eating red meats, fried and oily foods and some other type of foods but different research shows multiple theories about it.


=== Function ===
It is commonly believed that sebum acts to save skin from drying or to waterproof hair and skin. But some scientists have contended that "low levels of sebaceous gland activity are not correlated with dry skin", and it may serve little or no purpose in modern humans.


=== Composition ===
The substances in sebum vary between species. In people, the lipid content is as follows:
Also, sapienic acid is a sebum fatty acid that is found only in people, not in animals.


=== Control ===
The following medicines have been shown to reduce the flow of sebum from skin:
Isotretinoin
SMT D002
Spironolactone (suitable for females only)


== Changes during development ==
The sebaceous glands of a human fetus in utero secrete a substance called Vernix caseosa, a "waxy" or "cheesy" white substance covering the skin of newborn babies.
The activity of the sebaceous glands increases during puberty because of heightened levels of androgens. In males, sebaceous glands begin to appear predominantly on the penis, on the shaft and around the rim of the penile head during and after puberty. This is however normal, not to be confused with an STD. In females, they appear predominantly in the labia minora.


== Diseases ==
Sebaceous glands are involved in skin problems such as oily skin, acne, and keratosis pilaris. In the skin pores, sebum and keratin can create a hyperkeratotic plug called a "microcomedo" which can block a pore and cause pimples. The prescription medicine isotretinoin significantly reduces the amount of sebum produced by the sebaceous glands, and is used to treat acne.
The extreme use (up to 10 times doctor-prescribed amounts) of anabolic steroids by bodybuilders, for muscle gain can also cause acne. The sebaceous gland is stimulated due to some steroid conversion into dihydrotestosterone. This event may cause serious acne on the face, neck, chest, back and shoulders.
A blocked sebaceous gland can result in a sebaceous cyst.
A condition involving enlarged sebaceous glands is known as sebaceous hyperplasia.

Sebaceous gland carcinoma is a very uncommon and aggressive form of cancer involving the sebaceous glands; sebaceous adenoma is a more benign neoplasm of the sebaceous glands.
Sebum can also build up around body piercings.


== Importance to other animals ==
Certain species of Demodex mites feed on sebum and are commonly found in the sebaceous glands of mammals, including those of humans.
The preputial glands of mice and rats are large modified sebaceous glands that produce pheromones.


== Additional images ==


== References ==


== Other websites ==
Histology at Boston University: 08801loa - "Integument: scalp".
MeSH name: Sebaceous+Glands.Self-injury (SI) or self-harm (SH) occurs when a person hurts his or her body on purpose. This kind of harm is not suicidal behaviour. Many self-harmers hurt themselves because they feel it is the only way to stay alive. However, in some cases the self-harm becomes so bad it can lead to death, and those who self-harm are more likely to commit suicide than those who do not.
There are many different reasons why a person may hurt themselves, though it is often hard to find an exact cause. Sometimes, the self-harm helps relieve unbearable emotions, or feelings of unreality or numbness. Self-harm is often a symptom of other problems. These problems may include physical abuse, sexual abuse, or eating disorders. Self-harm may also stem from mental problems such as low self esteem or perfectionism.
Studying the causes of self-injury can be difficult or inaccurate, because many self-harmers try to hide their injuries.[source?]


== Types of self-injury ==

Self-injury is a general term that includes many different types of deliberate harm to the body. There are many things that can be considered self-harm. If someone works their body too hard, for example, this can be seen as a mild form of self-injury. In other mild cases, a self-harmer may purposely pick off scabs to keep cuts or scratches from healing. Compulsive hair-pulling (trichotillomania) and compulsive skin-picking (dermotillomania) are impulse control disorders which are also mild forms of self-harm.
In more severe cases, a self-harmer could break or sprain a bone, or lose a dangerous amount of blood. Biting, burning, and cutting are other forms of self-injury. Overdosing on medication is another common type of self-harm.
Self-harm may get worse the longer a person has been doing it. This is because a person's body builds up tolerance to (gets used to) the pain from their injuries. Because of this, they have to hurt themselves more to get the same effect. In some cases, this can lead to fatal or near-fatal injuries.
A person may go through voluntary pain for other reasons that are usually not considered self-injury. A self-inflicted wound is when someone injures themselves to avoid something, not because of psychological problems. Some people give themselves a self-inflicted wound during wartime so that they do not have to serve in the military.
Some people go through pain to change the way they look, such as in ear piercing. This is called body modification. Body modification is not a form of self-injury.
Scarification is a type of body modification where someone cuts or burns their skin for decoration. This can include branding, which is common in some fraternities. It can also include cutting the skin repeatedly in a pattern or design. This will create very large scars. Some African tribes use scarification as a symbol of beauty and strength.


== Self-injury in the population ==
Experts estimate that about 1% of the population has self-harmed. While people of all ages and ethnic groups have self-harmed, some groups are more likely to self-harm than others. Age, gender, and race can be factors in the risk of self-injury. Some evidence suggests that self-injury is also more common in people who have a family history of suicide or self-injury.


=== Age ===
In general, more young people are treated for self-injury than any other age group. According to one Australian study 30% of teenagers say they have self-injured. It is more widespread among those with mental illness. One in four (25%) of teenagers with mental illnesses have self-harmed. Self-harm in females is most common between the ages of 15-24. Males are most likely to self-harm through the ages 25-34.
Recent research focusing on young people suggests that 10 percent of 15 to 16 year olds have self-harmed. In this case, the self-harm was usually done by cutting.


=== Gender ===
A study in Oxford in the year 2000 found that approximately 300 per 100,000 (0.3%) of males aged between 15 and 24 years, and 700 per 100,000 (0.7%) of females of the same age, were admitted into a hospital after self-harming. Based on statistics like these, most agree that young white females are most likely to self-injure. Possibly because of this, it is usually believed that women have higher rates of self-harm than men. However, this may not be true because women are more likely to get help for their self-injury. Males may have the same or similar rates of self-injury as women. Some findings have even suggested that in the mid-30s age range, more men are treated for self-harm than women.


=== Discrimination ===
Minority groups who face discrimination are also more likely to self-injure. If someone is bullied because they are different (for example, because of their race, ethnicity or sexual orientation), this can lead to low self-esteem and a feeling of helplessness over emotions. This can lead some people to self-harm.


=== Personal history ===
Studies have show that those who have been abused are more likely to self-injure. Sexual abuse, physical abuse, and emotional abuse can cause low self-esteem, especially in children. It can also cause other emotional problems. Some people may turn to self-harm to relieve these emotions. Low self-esteem in victims of abuse may lead them to believe that the abuse was their fault. They may turn to self-injury because of this.
Unstable living conditions such as unemployment or divorce may also make a person more likely to self-harm.
Prisoners are also more likely to self-harm. This may be because of the ongoing trauma that happens in prisons, including sexual and physical violence and intimidation. In an environment such as prison, where options for inmates are limited, prisoners may turn to self-injury. In England and Wales, a report from The Howard League says that over 22,000 prisoners harmed themselves in 2007.
Those with learning and developmental disabilities such as autism are more likely to self-harm. The cause of this is unclear. Some case studies have shown that it may be a form of self-stimulation. It may be that autistic children who self-harm are trying to express frustration that they cannot explain with words. Autistic children who self-harm may do so by head-banging or biting.


== Treatment ==
Self-harm is an addictive behaviour. Once someone starts self-injury, it is difficult for them to stop, even if they want to. This makes professional help and treatment an important part of recovery from self-injury.
The type of treatment that is most effective is different from person to person. There are many different types of therapy that have been used to help people that self-harm.
Cognitive-behavioural therapy may help a person understand why they self-harm. Cognitive-behavioural therapy is used to help patients understand the reasons for their problem. This is so that the patient may learn what is causing their self-harm, and learn how to deal with these problems in a way other than self-harm.
Therapies used for post-traumatic stress disorder may also help. This is because many people who self-harm have been victims of abuse. Eye Movement Desensitization and Reprocessing therapy (EMDR) is an example of this.
Drugs may also be used to help treat self-injury. It is thought that self-injury can release chemical endorphins into the brain. Over time, these chemicals can become addictive. There are some drugs that can help with this addiction, but they have not been proven to help people who self-injure. Naltrexone and naloxone are two drugs being researched for this kind of treatment. Research involving endorphins has been mostly done with animals. It is unclear if their brain chemistry changes the outcome of the research.


== References ==


== Further reading ==
Borderline Personality Disorder and Childhood Abuse: Revisions in Clinical Thinking and Treatment Approach. Eleanor A. Saunders, Ph.D. and Frances Arnold, Ph.D. Stone Center, Wellesley College, Wellesley, MA 02181. No. 51, 1991. 16 pages.
Beyond Bedlam: Contemporary Women Psychiatric Survivors Speak Out. Edited by Jeanine Grobe. Copyright 1995 by Third Side Press, Inc. 252 pages. Published by Third Side Press, Inc., Chicago, IL.Severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)  was an atypical pneumonia. It started in November 2002 in Guangdong Province, in the city of Foshan, of the People's Republic of China. The disease was caused by the SARS coronavirus (SARS CoV), a new coronavirus. It was also a part-time STD, it can be spread through both sexual and casual contact.
SARS was first reported in Asia in February 2003. Over the next few months, the illness spread to more than 24 countries in Asia, North America, South America, and Europe before the SARS global outbreak of 2003 was contained. According to the World Health Organization (WHO), a total of 8098 people worldwide became sick with SARS during the 2003 outbreak; 774 of these died.
After the Chinese government suppressed news of the SARS outbreak, the disease spread rapidly, reaching Hong Kong and Vietnam in late February 2003, and then to other countries via international travellers. The last case in this outbreak occurred in June 2003. There were a total of 8437 known cases of the disease, with 813 deaths (a mortality rate of 9.636%).
In May 2005 the disease itself was declared 'eradicated' by the WHO and it became the second disease in mankind to receive this label (the other was smallpox). The New York Times reported that "not a single case of severe acute respiratory syndrome has been reported this year or in late 2004. It is the first winter without a case since the initial outbreak in late 2002. Also, the epidemic strain of SARS that caused at least 813 deaths worldwide by June of 2003 has not been seen outside a laboratory since then." 


== References ==Sexual fetishism (also erotic fetishism or fetish) is sexual arousal caused by an object or body part that is not normally thought of as sexual. The term was made in the late 1800s by Alfred Binet.


== Partialism ==
Partialism is a type of sexual fetishism where the sexual want of a body part is more than the sexual want of the person who has the body part. Martin Kafka states that partialism is not exactly the same as fetishism, although common use does not agree.


== References ==The human shoulder is made up of three bones: the clavicle (collarbone), the scapula (shoulder blade), and the humerus (upper arm bone) as well as muscles, ligaments and tendons.
The articulations (surfaces) between the bones of the shoulder make up the shoulder joints. The shoulder joint is the part of the body where the humerus attaches to the scapula, the head sitting in the glenoid fossa. The shoulder as a whole is the complete group of structures in the region of the joint.
There are two kinds of cartilage in the joint. The first type is the white cartilage on the ends of the bones (called articular cartilage) which allows the bones to glide and move on each other. When this type of cartilage starts to wear out (a process called arthritis), the joint becomes painful and stiff.
The labrum is a second kind of cartilage in the shoulder which is distinctly different from the articular cartilage. This cartilage is more fibrous or rigid than the cartilage on the ends of the ball and socket. Also, this cartilage is also found only around the socket where it is attached.
The shoulder must be mobile enough for the wide range actions of the arms and hands, but also stable enough to allow for actions such as lifting, pushing and pulling. The compromise between mobility and stability results in a large number of shoulder problems not faced by other joints such as the hip.


== References ==A silent stroke is a kind of stroke that does not cause symptoms that can be seen in a major stroke such as slurred speech. A person who has had a silent stroke usually does not know it. A silent stroke still causes damage to the brain, and places the person at increased risk for both transient ischemic attack and major stroke in the future.
These strokes are called "silent" because they typically happen in parts of the brain that do not cause problems that can be seen like those in a major stroke. A silent stroke usually happens in parts of the brain that control different thought processes, mood regulation and cognitive functions and is a leading cause of vascular cognitive impairment and may also lead to a loss of urinary bladder control.
In a big study in 1998, more than 11 million people were thought to have had a stroke in the United States. About 770,000 of these strokes had symptoms which could be seen and 11 million were first-ever silent strokes. Silent strokes usually cause lesions which are found by the use of neuroimaging such as MRI.
There is more of chance of older people having a silent stroke but it may also happen to younger adults. Women appear to be at higher risk for silent stroke, with hypertension and current cigarette smoking being some of the reasons.
These types of strokes include lacunar and other ischemic strokes and minor hemorrhages. They may also include leukoaraiosis (changes in the white matter of the brain): the white matter is more susceptible to vascular blockage because it has less blood vessels than the cerebral cortex.
In the Cardiovascular Health Study, a study used 3,660 adults over the age of 65, 31% showed evidence of silent stroke in neuroimaging studies using MRI. These people did not know they had a stroke. It is thought that silent strokes are five times more common than strokes that have symptoms.
A silent stroke is different than a transient ischemic attack (TIA). In TIA the symptoms can be seen and may last from a few minutes to 24 hours before getting better. If a person has a TIA there is a bigger chance they may have a major stroke and silent strokes in the future.


== Kinds of silent stroke ==
Ischemic stroke: occurs when a blood vessel that brings blood to the brain becomes blocked. This type of stroke happens in 87 percent of all stroke cases.
Hemorrhagic stroke: occurs when a blood vessel that brings blood to the brain gets weak and splits open causing bleed to come out of the blood vessel. Usually hemorrhagic stroke is caused by two kinds of problems that cause weak blood vessels: aneurysms and arteriovenous malformations (AVMs).
Lacunar infarcts (LACI) are small (0.2 to 15 mm in diameter) noncortical (does not happen in the cerebral cortex) stroke caused by the blockage of a single penetrating branch of a larger blood vessel that brings blood to the inside parts of the brain including the white matter. LACIs are usually happen in cases of white matter lesions (WML) which can be seen using computerized tomography (CT scans).


== References ==Smallpox was a very bad disease with a high mortality rate. It is caused by a virus. There are two different species of viruses that can cause the disease. They are Variola major and Variola minor. Some people also call smallpox Variola, named after the viruses' scientific name.
Only humans can get this disease. Variola major kills between 20% and 40% of those who get it. Variola minor kills only about 1%. Many people who survive become blind because of the damage the virus does to the eyes.
During the first half of the 20th century, between 300 million and 500 million people died of this disease. Even in 1967, about 15 million people caught the disease, and about two million people died of it, according to the World Health Organization (WHO).
The first vaccine for smallpox used the results of cowpox infections. It was invented by Edward Jenner. It was used to stop people from getting smallpox. The word "vaccine" came from "vaccina", the Latin word for cow, because cowpox was used. The WHO (World Health Organisation) said that they were trying to eradicate (completely destroy) smallpox in 1963. They vaccinated people all over the world. In 1980, the WHO said the disease no longer existed, and no one would ever get sick from it again. However, live copies of smallpox are kept in different maximum-security laboratories around the world.
Some people believe that smallpox could be used as an agent for purposely infecting enemies in a war. Today, most people no longer receive a smallpox shot; but a few very, very old people still need it.
If somebody has smallpox, their entire body is covered in bumps infiltrated by blood that are worse than chicken pox.


== Related pages ==
Cowpox
Poxviridae
List of diseases


== References ==Spinal tumors is a form of tumor that grows in the spinal cord. Extradural tumors are more common than intradural neoplasms.


== Forms ==
Depending on their location, the spinal cord tumors can be:
Extradural - outside the dura mater lining (most common)
Intradural - part of the dura
Intramedullary - inside the spinal cord
Extramedullary- inside the dura, but outside the spinal cord


== Notable cases ==
Dan Haggerty, American actor
John Houseman, British actor
John Marshall Harlan II, American judge
Kim Anderzon, Swedish actress


== References ==Stomach cancer, or gastric cancer, is a kind of cancer from any part of the stomach. Stomach cancer causes about 800,000 deaths worldwide per year. Odds of survival is 5 to 15%. The life span of someone with stomach cancer is five to fifteen years. This is because this type of cancer can spread faster than other cancers.
Most stomach cancer is caused by Helicobacter pylori infection. Diet foods are not proven causes, but some foods, such as smoked foods, salted fish and meat, and pickled vegetables are associated with a higher risk.


== References ==Streptococcal pharyngitis or strep throat is an illness that is caused by the bacteria called “group A streptococcus”. Strep throat affects the throat and the tonsils. The tonsils are the two glands in the throat at the back of the mouth. Strep throat can also affect the voice box (larynx). Common symptoms include fever, throat pain (also called a sore throat), and swollen glands (called lymph nodes) in the neck. Strep throat causes 37% of sore throats among children.
Strep throat spreads through close contact with a sick person. To be sure that a person has strep throat, a test called a throat culture is needed. Even without this test, a likely case of strep throat can be known because of the symptoms. Antibiotics can help a person with strep throat. Antibiotics are medicines that kill bacteria. They are used mostly to prevent complication such as rheumatic fever rather than to shorten the length of sickness.


== Signs and symptoms ==
The usual symptoms of strep throat are a sore throat, fever of more than 38 °C (100.4 °F), pus (a yellow or green fluid made up of dead bacteria, and white blood cells) on the tonsils, and swollen lymph nodes.
There can be other symptoms such as:
Head pain (headache)
Vomiting or the urge to vomit (nausea)
Stomach pain
Muscle pain
Rash (small red bumps) on the body or in the mouth or throat. This is an unusual but a specific sign.
A person who gets strep throat will show symptoms one to three days after coming in contact with a sick person.


== Cause ==
Strep throat is caused by a type of bacteria called group A beta-hemolytic streptococcus (GAS). Other bacteria or viruses can also cause a sore throat. People get strep throat by direct, close contact with a sick person. The illness can spread more easily when people are crowded together. Examples of crowding include people in the military or in schools. The GAS bacteria can dry out into dust, but then it cannot make people sick. If bacteria in the environment are keep moist they can make people sick for up to 15 days. Moist bacteria can be found on things like toothbrushes. These bacteria can live in food, but this is very unusual. People who eat the food can become sick. Twelve percent of children with no symptoms of strep throat have GAS in their throats normally.


== Diagnosis ==
A checklist called the modified Centor score helps doctors decide how to care for people with sore throats. The Centor score has five clinical measurements or observations. It shows how likely it is that someone has strep throat.
One point is given for each of these criteria:
No cough
Swollen lymph nodes or lymph nodes that hurt if they are touched
Temperature greater than 38 °C (100.4 °F)
Pus or swelling of the tonsils
Under the age of 15 years (a point is taken away if the person is older than 44 years)


=== Laboratory testing ===
A test called a throat culture is the main way to know if a person has strep throat. This test is correct 90 to 95 percent of the time. There is another test called a rapid strep test, or RADT. The rapid strep test is faster than a throat culture but correctly finds the illness only 70 percent of the time. Both tests can show when a person does not have strep throat. They can show this correctly 98 percent of the time.
When a person is sick a throat culture or rapid strep test can tell if the person is sick from strep throat. People who have no symptoms should not be tested with a throat culture or rapid strep test as some people have streptococcal bacteria in their throats normally without any bad results. And these people do not need treatment.


=== Causes of similar symptoms ===
Strep throat has some of the same symptoms as other illnesses. Because of this, it can be hard to know if a person has strep throat without a throat culture or rapid strep test. If the person has fever and sore throat with coughing, a runny nose, diarrhea, and red itchy feeling eyes, it is more likely to be a sore throat that is caused by a virus. Infectious mononucleosis can cause swollen lymph nodes in the neck and a sore throat, fever, and it can make the tonsils get bigger. This diagnosis can be determined by a blood test. There is however no specific treatment for infectious mononucleosis.


== Prevention ==
Some people get strep throat more often than others. Removing the tonsils is one way to stop these people from getting strep throat. Getting strep throat three or more times in one year may be a good reason to remove the tonsils. Waiting is also appropriate.


== Treatment ==
Strep throat usually lasts a few days without treatment. Treatment with antibiotics will usually make the symptoms go away 16 hours quicker. The main reason for treatment with antibiotics is to reduce the risk of getting a more serious illness. For example, a heart disease known as rheumatic fever or a collection of pus in the throat known as retropharyngeal abscess. Antibiotics work well if given within 9 days of the start of symptoms.


=== Pain medication ===
Medicine to lessen pain can help with the pain caused by strep throat. These usually include NSAIDs or paracetamol which is also known as acetaminophen. Steroids are also useful, as is viscous lidocaine. Aspirin may be used in adults. It is not good to give aspirin to children because it makes them more likely to get Reye's syndrome.


=== Antibiotic medicine ===
Penicillin V is the most common antibiotic used in the United States for strep throat. It is popular because it is safe, works well and does not cost much money. Amoxicillin is usually used in Europe. In India, it is more likely for people to get rheumatic fever. Because of this, an injected medicine called benzathine penicillin G is the usual treatment. The antibiotics lower the average length of symptoms. The average length is three to five days. Antibiotics lowers this by about one day. These medicines also reduce the spread of the illness. The medicines are used mostly to try to reduce rare complications. These include rheumatic fever, rashes, or infections. The good effects of antibiotics should be balanced by the possible side effects. Antibiotic treatment may not need to be given to healthy adults who have bad reactions to medication. Antibiotics are used for strep throat more often than would be expected from how serious it is and the speed at which it spreads. The medicine erythromycin (and other medicines, called macrolides) should be used for people who have bad allergies to penicillin. Cephalosporins can be used in people with lesser allergies. Streptococcal infections might also lead to swelling of the kidneys (acute glomerulonephritis). Antibiotics do not reduce the chance of this condition.


== Outlook ==
The symptoms of strep throat usually get better, with or without treatment, in about three to five days. Treatment with antibiotics reduces the risk of worse illnesses. They also make it harder to spread the illness. Children may return to school 24 hours after first taking antibiotics.
These very bad problems might be caused by strep throat:
These include rheumatic fever or scarlet fever
A deadly illness called toxic shock syndrome
Glomerulonephritis
An illness called PANDAS syndrome. This is an immune problem that causes sudden, sometimes serious behavioral problems.


== Likelihood ==
Strep throat is included in the broader category of sore throat or pharyngitis. About 11 million people get sore throats in the United states each year. Most cases of sore throat are caused by viruses. The bacteria group A beta-hemolytic streptococcus causes 15 to 30 percent of sore throats in children. It causes 5 to 20 percent of sore throats in adults. Cases usually happen in late winter and early spring.


== References ==A stroke is an event which damages part of the brain. This can happen if an artery that feeds blood to the brain gets clogged, or if it tears and leaks.
Strokes are often called a brain attack because of the similarities it has to a heart attack. A heart attack is when there is a lack of blood flow to the heart and a stroke is when there is a lack of blood flow to the brain. There are two types of strokes. One is when there is a blood clot blocking the artery. An artery is a type of tube that takes blood to different parts of your body. The other type of stroke is when a blood vessel bursts and there is blood moving around freely in the brain. A blood vessel is another type of tube that carries blood to your body.
A stroke, or cerebrovascular accident (CVA), is the rapid loss of brain function(s) due to disturbance in the blood supply to the brain. This can happen because of ischemia (lack of blood flow) caused by blockage (thrombosis, arterial embolism), or a haemorrhage (leakage of blood).
As a result, the affected area of the brain cannot work properly. Symptoms might include: hemiplegia (an inability to move one or more limbs on one side of the body), aphasia (inability to understand or use language), or an inability to see one side of the visual field.
A stroke is a medical emergency. It can cause permanent damage. If it is not quickly treated, it may lead to death. It is the third most common cause of death and the most common cause of disability for adults in the United States and Europe.
Strokes happen on both the left and right side of the brain. When a stroke happens on the left side of someone’s brain, it affects the right side of the body. It can also cause problems with the patient’s speech and language. If a stroke affects the right side of the brain, it affects the left side of the body. It also changes patient’s spatial (relating to space) perceptions. Getting a stroke on the right side of the brain can also cause people to not acknowledge their illness. Patients behave impulsively and neglect the side of their body.

Factors that increase the risk of a stroke include old age, high blood pressure, a previous stroke, diabetes, high cholesterol, smoking, atrial fibrillation, migraine with aura, and thrombophilia (a tendency to thrombosis). Of those factors, the most easy to fix are high blood pressure and smoking.


== How are Strokes Identified? ==


=== Pre-Hospital ===
The Cincinnati Prehospital Stroke Scale was designed to help "pre-hospital" medical professionals (like EMTs) identify a possible stroke before the patient gets to the hospital. It tests three basic signs. If any of these signs are not normal, the patient may be having a stroke and should be transported to a hospital as soon as possible.
Facial droop: Have the person smile or show his or her teeth.
Normal: Both sides of face move equally
Abnormal: One side of face does not move as well as the other (or at all); part of the face looks like it is drooping

Arm drift: Have the person close his or her eyes and hold his or her arms straight out for about 10 seconds.
Normal: Both arms move equally or not at all
Abnormal: One arm does not move, or one arm drifts down compared with the other side

Speech: Have the person say, "You can't teach an old dog new tricks," or some other simple, familiar saying.
Normal: Patient uses correct words with no slurring
Abnormal: Patient's speech is slurred, patient uses incorrect words, or is unable to speak

About 72% of patients who cannot do one of these three tasks normally are having an ischemic stroke. More than 85% of patients who cannot do all three tasks are having an acute stroke.


=== "Spot a Stroke" ===
The "Spot a Stroke" campaign, created by the American Heart Association and the American Stroke Association, teaches everyday people how to recognize a stroke. The Spot a Stroke campaign teaches the basic tests from the Cincinnati Stroke Scale, using the acronym FAST:
F: Face - Facial Droop. Is one side of the face drooping or numb? Ask the person to smile. Is the person's smile uneven?
A: Arm - Arm Weakness. Is one arm weak or numb? Ask the person to raise both arms. Does one arm drift downward?
S: Speech - Speech Difficulty. Is speech slurred? Is the person unable to speak or hard to understand? Ask the person to repeat a simple sentence, like "The sky is blue." Is the sentence repeated correctly?
T: Time - Time to Call 999. If someone shows any of these symptoms, even if the symptoms go away, call 9-1-1 and get the person to the hospital immediately. Check the time so you'll know when the first symptoms appeared.


=== In the Hospital ===
Once the patient is in the hospital, doctors can find out for sure whether they are having a stroke by looking at their brain with special scanning machines, like an MRI or a CT scanner.


== Prevention ==
Strokes can kill. To prevent a stroke, doctors advise people to:
Control your blood pressure
Stop smoking
Exercise at least once a week
Stay at a healthy weight
Do not drink too much
Get regular checkups


== Statistics ==
795,000 people in the United States get a stroke each year
One out of four people who have a stroke die (137,000 deaths from stroke per year)
Currently, 3 million people in the US have disabilities from strokes
In US, strokes cost $57.9 billion per year (damage and loss of work)
⅔ of stroke happen in people 65 and up
Strokes affect men more than women
Women more likely to die from stroke than men
Strokes are more common in African Americans
Strokes are more likely to be fatal in African Americans
Stroke rates in older adults are declining but rates in younger people are rising (scientists think that it’s related to obesity)
Physical therapy can help patients
Some people are in a wheelchair after getting a stroke
10% of survivors suffer no long term disabilities
10% of survivors suffer from so many disabilities that they have to stay in 24 hour care


== References ==


== More reading ==
J.P. Mohr et al. (2004). Stroke: pathophysiology, medical diagnosis, and management. New York: Churchill Livingstone. ISBN 0-443-06600-0.
Perry, Thomas and Miller Frank (1961). Pathology: a dynamic introduction to medicine and surgery. Boston: Little, Brown and Company.


== Other websites ==
The basis for this article was the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke public domain resource at this page
Canadian Stroke Network
Registry of the Canadian Stroke Network
StrokEngine (McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada) Focuses on stroke rehabilitation and interventions
Cerebrovascular disease and risk of stroke
"What happens during a stroke". NLM. http://health-net-now.blogspot.com/2007/04/stroke-what-happens-during-stroke.html. Retrieved 2007-04-15. video
American Stroke Association
National Stroke Association
Heart and Stroke Foundation of Canada
The Stroke Association UK
Heart attack, stroke and cardiac arrest warning signs, from the American Heart Association
StrokeMD.net
National Stroke Association of Malaysia
Outcome of childhood stroke UKStyes (/ˈstaɪ/), also hordeolum (/hɔrˈdiːələm/) are infections at the base of a human eyelid or the eyelash. They are usually formed in the lids and are small red bumps; these styes can be either external or internal. Styes are small-sized and rather short in duration. They happen particularly often in infants, although people of all ages can get it. They're triggered by eye rubbing or poor nutrition. They often last four days under treatment to two weeks without.The submandibular glands are salivary glands. They are under the bottom part of the mouth.Suicide is when a person chooses to kill themselves. When someone kills themselves, people say that they have "committed suicide" or "completed suicide." When a person thinks about killing themselves, the person is described as suicidal.
When people start having thoughts about killing themselves, it is a medical emergency. They should get a suicide risk assessment as soon as possible. They should not be left alone.
There are many reasons why a person might think about committing suicide. Most people who are suicidal have some type of mental condition or illness. They may have a chronic condition, which means it has been going on for a long time. But it may be an acute condition – which means the first symptoms of mental illness happened rather quickly.
Depression is the mental illness that most often causes a person to have suicidal thoughts. Depression may also be a symptom of other mental or medical disorders.
Depression, which can lead to suicidal thoughts, has many possible causes. For example, it may also be caused by stress, and difficult events in a person's life, like losing a job or getting sick.
Suicide is one of the top three causes of death for young people aged 15–35 years-old. It is the second most common and the second leading cause of death for college students. Every 3 seconds, a person somewhere in the world tries to kill themselves. Every 40 seconds, some commits suicide. For every suicide, at least six other people are seriously affected.(WHO 2000)
Although depression is the main factor in suicide, it is also treatable and suicide is often preventable.


== Risk factors ==

There are many risk factors for suicide. However, it is important to remember that risk factors are not the same as causes. Risk factors do not cause suicide or suicidal thoughts. They only make it more likely that some people with those risk factors may become suicidal. If a person has a risk factor, that does not mean they are going to become suicidal.


=== Mental disorders ===
Most people who commit suicide have a mental disorder. Different studies found different rates, between 85%-95%.[source?] Depressive disorders account for about 80 percent of these numbers; schizophrenia, ten percent; and dementia and delirium about five percent.[source?]
Among people who have a mental disorder, 25% also have alcohol abuse issues. People who abuse alcohol have a 50% greater risk of suicide compared to those who do not.
While acts of self-harm are not considered suicide attempts, a person who self-harms may be more likely to commit suicide.


==== Emotions ====
Hopelessness: Feeling like there is no chance that things will get better. Hopelessness is very common in people who commit suicide.
Perceived burdensomeness: When a person feels like they are a burden to others (like they just cause problems for other people). Suicidal people often feel hopeless at the same time.
Loneliness: Feeling alone. Sometimes people actually are alone; sometimes they just feel lonely. People are more likely to feel suicidal if:They do not have people to support them, such as family and friends
They feel like they do not belong or fit in with other people
They live alone


==== Substance abuse ====
Substance abuse is the second most common reason for suicide and feeling suicidal. Only two serious mental illnesses - depression and bipolar disorder - cause more harm. A person is at greater risk for suicide whether they have been using drugs for a long time or just a short time. When a drug abuser is also sufffering from great sadness or grief, suicide is even more common.
More than half of suicides are at least partly due to alcohol or drug use.[source?] About one-fourth of suicides are committed by those sick with drug addiction or alcoholism.[source?] In teenagers and youth, the percent is even higher.


==== Problem gambling ====
Problem gamblers have more suicidal ideation and make more suicide attempts compared to the general population. (Problem gambling is gambling that causes major problems in a person's life.)
If a person becomes a problem gambler earlier in life, they have a higher risk of suicide for the rest of their life. Gambling-related suicide attempts are usually made by older people with gambling problems. Substance use and mental disorders[source?] increase the risk of suicide even more in people with problem gambling.


=== Medical conditions ===
There is a link between suicidality and medical conditions, including chronic pain, mild brain injury, (MBI) or traumatic brain injury (TBI). People with these conditions had a higher rate of suicide that was not caused by depression or alcohol abuse. People with more than one medical condition had an even higher risk of suicide.
Problems with sleeping, such as insomnia and sleep apnea, may be risk factors for depression and suicide. In some people, the sleep problem itself, not depression, may be what increases their risk for depression.
People being treated for mood disorders should be checked by a doctor. This should include a physical examination and blood tests. This can make sure the person's mood disorder is not caused by a medical problem. Many medical conditions can cause problems with mood and thinking. Seeing a doctor will also help make sure that it is safe to prescribe medications for the person's mood disorder.


==== Biology ====

Some mental disorders that are risk factors for suicide may be partly caused by problems in the brain and body.
Serotonin is an important brain neurotransmitter (a chemical messenger). Some studies have found that people who tried to kill themselves had low levels of serotonin in their brains. People who completed suicide had the lowest levels. Low serotonin levels are a risk factor for suicide, even if a person has never had depression.
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF): This is a protein that helps nerves grow. Problems with how BDNF works may help cause several mood disorders linked with suicidal behavior, including major depressive disorder. Studies of suicide victims have shown very low levels of BDNF in the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, even in people who had no mental illness.
Even if they have the same risk factors, some people are at a higher risk for suicide than others. This is partly because of genetic inheritance. Genetics causes about 30–50% of the difference in suicide risk among different people. For example, a person whose parent committed suicide is much more likely to try to kill themselves. Epigenetics may also affect suicide risk.


=== Media coverage ===
How the media shows news stories of suicide may have a negative effect and trigger the possibility of copycat suicides (this is called the Werther effect). This risk is greater in teenagers and young adults.
The opposite of the Werther effect is the Papageno effect. This means that the media can help make suicide less likely if they cover good ways of dealing with stress and difficult things in life.


=== Others ===
A person is also more likely to complete suicide if:


== Protective factors ==
Protective factors make it less likely that a person will commit suicide. They help protect a person from the risk of suicide. They can also help protect a suicidal person from the effects of suicidal thinking.
Protective factors can be internal, such as a person's personal strengths and beliefs. For example:
Having skills like good ways of dealing with stress and solving problems
Having religious or cultural beliefs that say life is important
Having reasons for living
Protective factors can also be external, such as a person's relationships and life situation. These factors can include:
Having strong connections with family and friends, who are supportive
Not being able to get items which are very deadly if used for a suicide attempt (like a gun)
Having someone who helps the person get the treatment and help they need
Being able to easily get good care and treatment for mental, physical, and substance abuse disorders
Protective factors are as important to identify as risk factors. Just as risk factors can be reduced, protective factors can be increased.


== Prevention ==

Suicide prevention tries to decrease the number of suicides by using protective measures. Some prevention strategies make it harder for people to get the most common things used to commit suicide. This includes taking away guns, poisons, and drugs.
Studies have shown that good treatment of depression, alcohol abuse, and drug abuse can decrease the number of suicides. So does follow-up contact with those who have made a suicide attempt.
In many countries, people who are at high risk of hurting themselves can check themselves into a hospital emergency department. In some countries or states, a doctor, judge, or police officer can force a person to go to the hospital if they seem suicidal, even if the person does not want to go.[source?] The person will be watched closely at the hospital to make sure they do not hurt themselves. A doctor or mental health professional will decide whether the person needs to go to a psychiatric hospital.
"SOS Signs of Suicide" is a suicide prevention program used in secondary schools for students between 13 to 17 years old. The program educations students about suicide, and tests them for suicide risk. Students who have done this program make less suicide attempts than students who have not done the program.
Suicide hotlines and crisis intervention centers help students who are at high risk. They help people who have suicidal thoughts.
A suicide risk assessment looks at how likely a person is to attempt suicide. A good assessment can help prevent a suicide. It is also the first step in coming up with a treatment plan. Even though suicide risk assessments are very important, they are usually not done. Many mental health care workers have little or no training in how to do a suicide risk assessment.


== Epidemiology ==

Worldwide suicide rates have increased by 60% in the past 45 years, mainly in the developing countries. As of 2006:
Suicide was the tenth leading cause of death in the world
About a million people died of suicide every year (this means that 16 out of every 100,000 people in the world died from suicide every year)
A person completed suicide every 40 seconds
According to 2007 information, suicides happen twice as often as homicides in the United States. Suicide is the 11th leading cause of death in the country, ahead of liver disease and Parkinson's disease.
Suicide rates vary a great deal across the world. Lithuania has the highest suicide rate.
30% of deaths by suicide are by people who are intoxicated.(Source:SAMSHA)


== Methods ==

The most common ways of committing suicide are not the same in every country. In different areas, they include hanging, pesticide poisoning, and firearms.
A 2008 report compared 56 countries, using information from the World Health Organization. It found that:
Hanging was the most common method in most of the countries. 53% of men who committed suicide, and 39% of women, used hanging.
Worldwide, 30% of people who commit suicide use pesticides. This method was most common in the Pacific area, where over half of people who committed suicide used pesticides. It was least common in Europe, where only 4% used this method.
In the United States 52% of suicides involve the use of firearms.
In the United States, asphyxiation and poisoning are also common. About 40% of suicides in the United States were committed using one of these methods.
Other people in the world commit suicide by:
Blunt force trauma (for example, from jumping off a building)
Cutting themselves and bleeding to death
Drowning themselves
Setting themselves on fire
Electrocuting themselves
Starving themselves
Sometimes, suicidal people do something that will make another person kill them. For example, a suicidal person might point a gun at a police officer, so the police officer will shoot the person in self-defense. This is commonly called "suicide by cop."


== Views of suicide ==
Modern medicine treats suicide as a mental health issue. When a person starts having many thoughts about killing themselves, it is considered a medical emergency.
The Abrahamic religions (like Christianity, Judaism, and Islam) think that life is sacred. They believe that when a person kills themselves, they are murdering what God has made.[source?] For this reason, many followers of Abrahamic religions thinks that when a person commits suicide, they will go to Hell.
The Dharmic and Taoist religions (like Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism, Taoism, Confucianism, and Shinto) believe that someone who commits suicide will be reincarnated in the next life with a less enlightened soul. However, many people of these religions are more likely to commit suicide because they believe that there will be a next life.[source?] They think that by committing suicide, they may have a better chance in the next life.[source?]


== Suicide as a weapon ==
There are several famous examples of suicide attacks in history. The Kamikazes were one example. They were Japanese fighter pilots during World War II, who would try to kill American soldiers by crashing their planes into American ships. By crashing their planes, they would kill themselves as well.
The September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on the United States were also done by suicide attackers. They flew planes into the World Trade Center buildings and the Pentagon.


== Related pages ==
Euthanasia
Suicide pact
Copycat suicide


== Other websites ==
Live Through This (stories from people who survived being suicidal)
Landmark Study Finds Columbia Suicide Severity Rating Scale Predicts Suicide Attempt
Rating Scale Successfully Predicts Suicide Attempts


=== Help for suicidal people ===
Learn more about suicide and how to get help for yourself or others
Learn from the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline
Learn from the Canadian Association for Suicide Prevention
Help for military veterans
Hotlines
United States:
The National Suicide Prevention Lifeline: (800) 273-TALK (available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week) or through online chat
List of hotlines for LGBT adults and young people (from the It Gets Better Project)
http://lostallhope.com Online help for suicidal people.

Canada:
Find a hotline near you (list from the Canadian Association for Suicide Prevention)
Kids Help Phone: (800) 668-6868 (for kids and teenagers)

Other countries:
To find a hotline in your country, use one of these lists from the International Association for Suicide Prevention or Befrienders Worldwide

Crisis Text Line: Text 741741


== References ==Syncope is the medical term for fainting or blacking out. It is a sudden loss of consciousness, usually for a short time. It is mostly because there is not enough oxygen in the brain. It can be for other reasons.
Fainting is quite common. It usually happens in two age ranges: the teenage years, and during older age. The chance of a person fainting at least once in a lifetime is about 40 to 50 percent. Syncope causes 1 to 3 percent of all attendances to emergency departments and 1 to 6 percent of all hospital admissions.


== References ==Syphilis is a sexually transmitted infection caused by a bacterium called Treponema pallidum. Syphilis is usually spread by sexual contact. However, a fetus can get syphilis from its mother while she is pregnant or during childbirth. This is called congenital syphilis.
There are four stages of syphilis: the primary, secondary, latent, and tertiary stages. In each stage, the signs and symptoms of syphilis are different.
In the primary stage, a person usually just has a wound on their skin, called a "chancre." In the secondary stage, a person usually gets a rash. In the "latent" stage, syphilis has few or no symptoms. If syphilis reaches the tertiary stage, which is the most severe, it causes many serious symptoms. These can include problems with the nervous system (the brain and nerves) and problems with the heart. Eventually, many people with tertiary syphilis will die if they do not get medical treatment.
Syphilis is usually diagnosed with blood tests. The bacteria that causes syphilis can also be seen under a microscope. Most people who have syphilis can be treated and cured with antibiotics.
By 1999, more than 12 million people around the world had gotten syphilis. More than 90% of these people (10.8 million) lived in the developing world. Syphilis got much less common after penicillin became available in the 1940s. At that time, penicillin was used as a treatment for syphilis, and often cured the disease. However, since 2000, syphilis is becoming more common again.
Syphilis can be a very dangerous disease if it is not treated. Without treatment, 8% to 58% of people with syphilis die from the disease. Syphilis also makes a person two to five times more likely to get Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV).


== Stages of syphilis ==


=== Primary stage ===

After a person gets syphilis, the disease begins in the primary stage. A person gets syphilis by having sex with a person who has syphilis. Usually, the person who has syphilis has wounds on their genitals caused by syphilis. Touching these wounds during sex (including oral sex or anal sex) can give a person syphilis.
Later, a chancre (skin sore) usually appears at the place on the body that touched the infected wounds. The chancre can be painful. The most common type of chancre gets bigger and bigger until it becomes an ulcer.
Chancres can appear in places other than the genitals. In women, chancres most often appear on the cervix - the bottom of the uterus. Some people get no chancres at all. Many people who have secondary syphilis (40–85% of women and 20–65% of men) say they never had a chancre during the primary stage.
Around the place where syphilis entered the body, the lymph nodes usually get bigger about 7 to 10 days after the chancre forms. If the person does not get treatment, their wound(s) can last for three to six weeks.


=== Secondary stage ===

If a person does not get treatment, syphilis will get worse. The secondary stage of syphilis will start about four to ten weeks after the person first got infected. Secondary syphilis can cause many different symptoms. However, the most common three symptoms are:
Sores on the mucous membranes (like the nose, throat, genitals, or anus)
A rash on the chest, back, hands, and/or feet
Swollen lymph nodes
All of the sores that people get during this stage can spread syphilis. The bacteria lives inside the wounds.
The symptoms of secondary syphilis usually get better after three to six weeks. However, in about 25% of cases (1 out of every 4), these symptoms can return.


=== Latent stage ===
In the latent stage of syphilis, a person has no symptoms, but blood tests show that he has syphilis. Latent syphilis is described as either early or late.
The early latent stage: In the United States, latent syphilis is called "early" if it has been less than one year since the person had secondary syphilis. In the United Kingdom, latent syphilis is called "early" if it has been less than two years.In this stage, the symptoms of secondary syphilis can still come back.

The late latent stage: People enter this stage when it has been more than one year (in the U.S.) or more than two years (in the U.K.) since they had secondary syphilis.
People in this stage have no symptoms, and do not spread syphilis as easily as people in the early latent stage.


=== Tertiary stage ===

If a person with syphilis does not get treatment, the disease can reach the worst stage - tertiary syphilis. Usually this happens about three to 15 years after the person first got infected. Without treatment, one-third of people with syphilis get tertiary disease. People with tertiary syphilis cannot infect other people with syphilis.
There are three different forms of tertiary syphilis.


==== Gummatous syphilis (late benign syphilis) ====
Gummatous syphilis can happen anywhere from one to 46 years after the person first got syphilis. On average, it happens after 15 years. It causes soft, tumor-like balls of inflammation (swelling), of many different sizes. Usually they appear on the skin, bone, and liver, but they can happen anywhere.
About 15% of people who do not get treated for syphilis get gummatous syphilis.


==== Neurosyphilis ====

In neurosyphilis, the syphilis infects the central nervous system (the brain and spinal cord). In some people, neurosyphilis happens soon after they get syphilis. (This is called early neurosyphilis.) Some of these people have no symptoms of neurosyphilis. Others get syphilitic meningitis, a dangerous infection of the meninges (the protective layers which line the brain and spinal cord).
Neurosyphilis can also appear later, usually four to 25 years after a person first got syphilis. (This is called late neurosyphilis.) Late neurosyphilis can cause many serious problems. For example:
Meningovascular syphilis, which causes seizures
General Paresis: In this brain disease, syphilis causes chronic meningoencephalitis - an infection of both the meninges and the brain which does not go away. This causes parts of the brain to die.Because of this, the person gets dementia (which causes problems with the way a person thinks, remembers, acts, and behaves toward other people)
The person also gets tabes dorsalis (which causes problems with balance, and pain in the legs and feet)

About 6.5% of people who do not get treated for syphilis get late neurosyphilis.


==== Cardiovascular syphilis ====
This type of tertiary syphilis causes problems with the cardiovascular system (the heart and blood vessels). It usually happens 10 to 30 years after the person first got infected with syphilis.
The most common problem it causes is syphilitic aortitis, which affects the aorta. The aorta is the most important artery in the heart; it helps carry blood to the entire body. Syphilitic aortitis can make the aorta become too big. If the aorta is too big, it cannot work correctly.
About 10% of people who do not get treated for syphilis get cardiovascular syphilis.


=== Congenital syphilis ===
Congenital syphilis is spread from a mother to her fetus during pregnancy or childbirth.
Two out of every three infants born with syphilis have no symptoms. In the other infants, symptoms can appear as the baby gets older. The most common symptoms are:
Hepatosplenomegaly (where two important organs, the liver and spleen, are larger than usual)
Rash
Fever
Neurosyphilis
Swelling in the lungs
If babies with syphilis do not get treated, they can get late congenital syphilis, which has much more serious symptoms. For example, the child can have seizures, and their body and brain may not grow normally.


== Cause ==


=== Bacteria ===

Syphilis is caused by the Treponema pallidum bacterium. Treponema pallidum is a species of bacterium which is shaped like a spiral: a spirochaete. There are different types of Treponema pallidum bacteria, which are called subspecies.
Scientists think that Treponema pallidum can only live inside humans. The bacterium cannot survive outside a human for more than a few days.


=== Transmission: how syphilis is spread ===
Syphilis is spread mostly by sexual contact or during pregnancy from a mother to her fetus. Syphilis can pass through undamaged mucous membranes, or through damaged skin. Because of this, syphilis can be spread through oral sex, vaginal sex, and anal sex. It can also be spread by kissing, if the person with syphilis has a sore in their mouth.
Only a very small amount of the Treponema pallidum bacterium needs to get into a person's body to cause syphilis. However, not everybody who is exposed to primary or secondary syphilis will get the disease.
A person can get syphilis if they get a blood transfusion from someone with the disease. However, many countries test blood donations for syphilis. In countries that do not do this, getting syphilis from a blood transfusion is much more likely.
Scientists think syphilis is usually not spread by sharing needles (using the same needles to inject drugs).
A person cannot get syphilis from sitting on a toilet seat; using a hot tub or a swimming pool; sharing plates, cups, or utensils; sharing clothing; or doing other regular daily activities.


== Diagnosis ==

It is hard for doctors to diagnose syphilis just from the signs and symptoms that happen early on, because many diseases can cause skin sores and rashes. Instead, they can diagnose syphilis by doing a blood test, or by looking at the blood under a microscope. Blood tests are used more often, because they are easier to do. However, blood tests cannot tell which stage of syphilis a person has.


== Prevention ==
As of 2010, there is no vaccine that prevents syphilis.


=== Safer sex ===
Not having sexual contact with a person who has syphilis is one of the best ways to prevent getting syphilis.
If a person does not know if their sexual partner has syphilis, having safer sex can help protect them. For example, using a latex condom the right way lowers the risk of getting a sexually transmitted disease like syphilis. However, even if a person uses a condom, it is still possible for him to get syphilis.
Because of this, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) says that the best ways to prevent syphilis are:
To be in a long-term relationship with a partner who does not have syphilis;
For both partners to be loyal in their relationship and not have sexual contact with anyone else; and
To avoid using alcohol or other drugs, because they make people more likely to have risky, unsafe sex, which can spread syphilis.


=== Preventing congenital syphilis ===
Congenital syphilis in newborn babies can be prevented by testing mothers for syphilis during early pregnancy and treating women who are infected. By following these steps, in 2015, Cuba became the first country in the world to eradicate the spread of syphilis from Cuban mothers to their babies.
The United States Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) and the World Health Organization say that all pregnant women should be tested for syphilis. If a woman tests positive, her sexual partners (the people she has had sex with) should also be treated.
In most developed countries, congenital syphilis is not common. It still happens once in a while, when women do not get any health care during pregnancy. However, congenital syphilis is much more common in developing countries. Many women in these countries do not get healthcare during pregnancy, and others get healthcare that does not include testing for syphilis. When there are programs that make syphilis testing easier to get, fewer babies get congenital syphilis in these countries.


=== Preventing syphilis from spreading ===
If people do certain things, they are more likely to get syphilis. Medical professionals say that these people should get tested regularly. For example, the CDC says that men who have sex with men should be tested at least every year. Getting tested regularly helps prevent syphilis from being spread. If a person is tested and finds out that they have syphilis, they are more likely to get treatment, and will not accidentally spread syphilis to other people.
Syphilis is a notifiable disease in many places, including Canada, the countries in the European Union, and the United States. This means that if a healthcare provider (like a doctor or a nurse) knows that a patient has syphilis, the provider has to tell public health authorities that the patient is infected. Public health workers then talk to all of the patient's sexual partners. They tell them someone might have given them syphilis, without telling them who that person is. Doctors might also try to get patients with syphilis to tell their sexual partners to get treatment.


== Treatment ==


=== Early infections ===
Syphilis that is not complicated can usually be treated and cured by antibiotic medications.
Usually, people need just one dose of penicillin G or azithromycin. If a person cannot take either of these medicines (for example, because they are allergic to them), some other medications work too. For example, Doxycycline and tetracycline are two other possible choices; however, they cannot be used in pregnant women.
The Treponema pallidum bacterium has become resistant to many different antibiotics, including macrolides, clindamycin, and rifampin. This means that these antibiotics no longer kill the bacterium.


=== Late infections ===
Once a person is in the later stages of syphilis, the disease is harder to treat.
For example, if a person has neurosyphilis, they need antibiotics that will kill the infection in their central nervous system (their brain and major nerves). However, it is hard for penicillin G to get into the central nervous system. Because of this, a single shot of penicillin - which will usually cure early syphilis - is not enough to cure neurosyphilis. Instead, people with neurosyphilis usually need to be given large doses of penicillin for at least 10 days. Usually, they also need to get the medicine intravenously (through a needle placed into a vein) so it goes more directly to the central nervous system. If a person is allergic to penicillin, other antibiotics like ceftriaxone, doxycycline, or tetracycline can be used, but they have to be given over longer periods of time.
Once a person has late-stage syphilis, treatment will keep their syphilis from getting any worse. However, if syphilis has already damaged the person's body, the treatment will not make that damage go away. At best, treatment can only have a very small effect on the damage that has already happened.


=== Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction ===
Sometimes, the treatment for syphilis can cause a side effect called the Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction. This reaction usually starts within one hour after treatment begins, and lasts for 24 hours. Its symptoms include fever, muscle pains, headache, and a fast heart rate.
Antibiotic medication breaks open syphilis bacteria to kill them. As the bacteria break open, proteins come out of them. These proteins cause the Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction.


== Epidemiology ==
By 1999, syphilis had infected about 12 million people. More than 90% of these people lived in the developing world.

Syphilis causes problems in 700,000 to 1.6 million pregnancies every year. Syphilis can cause a pregnant woman to have a miscarriage, a stillbirth, a premature baby, a baby with congenital syphilis, or a baby that dies before it is a month old. In sub-Saharan Africa, syphilis causes up to 20% of perinatal deaths (deaths that happen soon after a baby is born).
Syphilis used to be very common, and it caused sickness and death all over the world. It was especially very common in Europe during the 18th and 19th centuries. During the early 20th century, syphilis quickly became less common in the developed world, because antibiotics were being used more and more. Syphilis kept becoming less common until the 1980s and 1990s. Since the year 2000, syphilis is getting more common again in the United States, the United Kingdom, Australia, and Europe, mostly among men who have sex with men.
In China and Russia, syphilis has gotten more common among heterosexual ("straight") people since the 1990s. Studies say this is because of unsafe sexual practices, like having sex with many different people, prostitution (getting paid to have sex), and not having safer sex to protect against sexually transmitted diseases.
Over the 19th and 20th centuries, the symptoms of syphilis have become less severe (not quite as bad). This is partly because there are more treatments that work well, and if they are given early, syphilis does not get as bad. Also, the bacteria that causes syphilis has become weaker.
If people with syphilis get treated early on, they can usually be cured without the disease causing damage that cannot be fixed. However, syphilis is still very dangerous. It still causes serious problems, and sometimes death, if it is not treated.
Syphilis also makes a person two to five times more likely to get HIV. Confection (having both syphilis and HIV) is common. In some big cities, it happens in as many as 30% to 60% of people with syphilis.


== History ==

Nobody knows exactly where and how syphilis started. There are two major ideas about where the disease came from.
The first idea is called the "Columbian hypothesis." (A hypothesis is an educated guess about how something happened). This hypothesis says that when Christopher Columbus's crew came back to Europe after exploring the "New World", they brought syphilis back to Europe and spread the disease there.
The other idea is called the "pre-Columbian hypothesis." ("Pre-Columbian" means "before Columbus.") This hypothesis says that syphilis was already in Europe before Columbus, and people just did not realize that the disease existed.
While there is evidence that can be used to say that either of these ideas are right, there is more evidence for the Columbian hypothesis.
The first written records that talk about an outbreak of syphilis in Europe are from 1494-1495. The outbreak happened in Naples, Italy, when France was invading (trying to take over Italy). Because syphilis was spread by French soldiers who were coming back from Italy, at first it was called the "French disease."
The name "syphilis" was first used in 1530 by an Italian doctor and poet named Girolamo Fracastoreo. He used the word "syphilis" as the title of a Latin poem that talked about the damage the disease was causing in Italy. At other times in history, syphilis was also called the "Great Pox".
In 1905, two men named Fritz Schaudinn and Erich Hoffmann discovered that syphilis is caused by the Treponema pallidum bacteria. Five years later, Paul Ehrlich created the first treatment that helped treat syphilis (called Salvarsan). After that, scientists started to study penicillin. In 1943, it was officially decided that penicillin worked for syphilis.
This was a major success in the treatment of syphilis. Before penicillin, the treatments used for syphilis were often even worse than the disease. For example, people were treated with mercury (which is poisonous and causes serious health problems), or people were just kept away from everyone else.
From 1932-1972, the United States Public Health Service did a study on syphilis in Alabama. They wanted to see how syphilis got worse when it was not treated. The researchers chose a group of poor African-American sharecroppers, but never told them they had syphilis. Even after the 1940s, when the researchers knew penicillin could cure these people, they refused to let them get treatment or even tell them that penicillin could help them. This study, now called the Tuskegee syphilis experiment, was very important in creating medical ethics.
Many famous people in history may have had syphilis. For example, some people think that Franz Schubert, Arthur Schopenhauer, Édouard Manet, and Adolf Hitler had the disease.


== Related pages ==
Sexually transmitted disease
Treponema pallidum bacterium
Safer sex
Tuskegee syphilis experiment


== References ==Tachycardia is the fast beating of the heart. In adults, it refers to heart rates higher than 100 beats per minute. Tachycardia may be a normal physiological response to stress, but depending on the cause and how healthy the patient is, tachycardia could be harmful and need medical treatment. In some cases, tachycardia can cause death.
Tachycardia can be harmful in two ways. First, when the heart beats too rapidly, it may perform inefficiently. Second, the faster the heart beats, the more oxygen and nutrients the heart requires. This can be especially problematic for patients suffering from ischaemic heart disease.Taste buds are small 'bumps' on the tongue. They are the sense organs which detect the taste of things that go into the mouth. They are involved in detecting the five (known) elements of taste perception: salty, sour, bitter, sweet, and umami.


== Other websites ==
Beyond the Tongue Map
Taste Perception: Cracking the Code
Scientists Explore the Workings of Taste Buds from National Public Radio's Talk of the Nation, July 22, 2005The temporal lobe is a region of the cerebral cortex that is under the Sylvian fissure on both cerebral hemispheres of the mammalian brain.
The temporal lobe is involved in auditory perception and is home to the primary auditory cortex. It is also important for the processing of semantics (meaning) in both speech and vision. The temporal lobe contains the hippocampus and plays a key role in the formation of long-term memory.
An area in the Sylvian fissure is the first place where auditory signals from the cochlea reach the cerebral cortex. This part of the cortex (primary auditory cortex) is involved in hearing. Other areas of the temporal lobes are involved in high-level auditory processing. In humans this includes speech, for which the left temporal lobe in particular seems to be specialized. Wernicke's area, which spans the region between temporal and parietal lobes, plays a key role (with Broca's area, which is in the frontal lobe). The functions of the left temporal lobe extends to comprehension, naming, verbal memory and other language functions.
The underside of the temporal lobes do high-level visual processing of faces and scenes. Front parts of this area are involved in object perception and recognition.
Deep inside the medial temporal lobes lie the hippocampus, which is essential for memory function – particularly the transfer from short to long term memory and control of spatial memory and behaviour.


== References ==Testicles are parts that are found on the bodies of male creatures. Male mammals, including men, have two testicles, supported in a sac of skin below the penis called the scrotum. Along with the penis, testicles are called reproductory organs or "sex organs". Only males have testicles; females have ovaries.
Testicles are a type of organ called glands. Like other glands, testicles make chemical substances, called hormones that keep the body working. Testicles also make sperm, which can join with ova to make new life.
Most glands, like women's ovaries, are inside the body, but testicles are outside the main part of the body. This is because the testicles work better if they are cooler than the inside of the body. In cold weather, testicles pull up nearer to the body to keep warm.


== Description ==
The testicles are firm, oval-shaped glands. Most testicles match in size, but some testicles are much larger or smaller than others. Normal sized testicles are between 14 cm³ to 35 cm³.
Nearly all men have one testicle that hangs lower than the other one. Scientists think this may be so that they do not hit against each other. It can be either the left or the right that hangs lower, but in about 85% of men, it is the right one which is lower. The right testicle usually descends first and this may affect which one hangs lower.
The testicles hang in the scrotum by the spermatic cord. They are outside the body because they need to be cooler than the temperature inside the body, in order to make sperm. If a man's testicles get cold, they are automatically pulled closer to the body. The spermatic cord is tightened by the cremasteric muscle. When this muscle contracts (pulls tighter), the cord gets shorter, which pulls the testicles closer to the body. If the testicles are too warm, the cremasteric muscle relaxes (gets longer.) This lowers the testicles to keep them cooler. This is how the testicles are kept at the right temperature. This is called the cremasteric reflex. (A reflex is something your body automatically does without you thinking about it.)
There are other uses for the cremasteric reflex apart from making the testicles the right temperature. Stress can also make the cremasteric reflex work. If a male human or mammal gets into a fight, then its testicles are in danger. They automatically pull up close to the body. The cremasteric reflex also happens during sexual intercourse.


== Function ==
Testicles have two important jobs in the body. They are part of two of the body's systems, the endocrine system which keeps the body working, and the reproductive system which makes new life.


=== Making hormones ===
Testicles are a type of organ called glands. (This makes them part of the body's endocrine system.) The human body has many types of glands. The job of glands within a body is to make chemical substances, and put them out into the body's system. A body has lots of different systems that keep it in good working order all the time, and that also provide for a body's special needs. Some of the body's special needs happen when a person gets angry, frightened or sick, or if the person wants to have sexual intercourse. At these times a body uses more of some types of chemical substance, so the glands that make them work harder.
Testicles make several types of chemical substances. They are not simple chemicals, but are very complicated and very important to life. Making these substances is controlled by the pituitary gland which is a small gland in the brain.
One substance made by the testicles is a type of substance known as a hormone. It is the hormone testosterone. Testosterone is important in a male person's body, because it makes him grow into a man and feel like a man during puberty. (Women's bodies make some testosterone too, but they make more female hormone called estrogen.)


=== Making sperm ===
As well as being chemical-producing glands, testicles are gonads. (This makes them part of the body's reproductive system.) Apart from hormones, the other important substances made by the testicles are spermatozoa, which are generally just called sperm. (The word "sperm" is plural, so you do not add a "s" and say "sperms".) The sperm are tiny living cells which can join with another cell, called an "ovum" (or egg) inside a female, to start a new human life. Scientists call making sperm spermatogenesis. Boys begin making sperm when they start growing into men, at a time of life called puberty.
Women do not have testicles. The glands in their bodies that do the same sort of jobs as testicles are called ovaries. Women have two ovaries, but unlike testicles, ovaries are inside the body, on either side of the uterus. They release ova (or eggs) and female hormones. Ovaries and testicles are sometimes called "gonads".


=== Details of how testicles are constructed and how they work ===
(See the picture, right)
The testicles, inside the scrotum, are covered with a tough type of white protective skin called a membrane.
The inner part of the testicles have many small tubes called seminiferous tubules which are coiled (or twisted around). Sperm are made inside the seminiferous tubules.
The sperm pass through some small tubes called ducts into another part at the back of the testicle, called the epididymis, which is where the sperm cells finish maturing.
The sperm cells then travel along a tube called the vas deferens until they reach the urethra.
The urethra is the main tube in the penis and leads to the opening at the end called the urethral opening. The urethral opening is also the way that urine leaves the body from the bladder.
When a man feels sexual desire, sperm cells go through the ejaculatory duct. They are combined with liquid called seminal fluid from a gland called the prostate. The prostate also has muscles that push the sperm and fluid into the urethra.
During sexual intercourse, seminal fluid containing the sperm comes out through the urethral opening when a man ejaculates.
If the sperm from the testicles enters the vagina of a woman during sexual intercourse, it may pass into the uterus and join with a mature ovum (or egg) to begin a new baby.


== Health issues ==


=== Size ===
Size in animals
Studying animals can help in understanding things about people. In mammals, testicles can be very big or very small in relation to the size of the animal itself. The size has to do with the amount of sperm that the male animal needs to make. Some types of male animal generally only have one sexual partner at a time and are called monogamous. Some types of animals generally live in a herd or flock where one male will have many female sexual partners. These males are called polygamous. More sperm is needed by polygamous males than by monogamous males. Polygamous males generally have larger testicles than monogamous males. The testicles grow larger to make more sperm.
Size in men
Most men's testicles are from 14 cm³ to 35 cm³. This is a measure of volume. Sometimes Doctors need to measure a man's testicles to see if there is a problem. Doctors can measure the volume of testicles in two ways:
Orchidometer – This is a set of small objects that look like eggs. They are many different sizes. The doctor picks the one that is the size of the testicle. Doctors know what size the orchidometer is. Then they know the size of the testicle.
Measuring the size – with a ruler, calipers, or ultrasound. Then these lengths are used to calculate the volume.
Sometimes the size of a man's testicles changes.
Some reasons why testicles get smaller are:
If a man takes testosterone, the testicles do not have to work to make testosterone, so they become smaller.
If a man's testicles are kept more warm than usual, they make less sperm. So if they are kept too warm, they get smaller.
If testicles are injured(hurt) they can become smaller.
Some reasons why testicles get bigger are:
If a man takes hormones from the pituitary gland, (called gonadotropins), it can make testicles bigger. Gonadtropins are the hormones that tell the testicles to make sperm and testosterone.
Some diseases cause testicles to swell.


=== Diseases ===
The most important diseases of testicles are:
Inflammation of the testicles. This is called orchitis
Testicular cancer
Fluid around a testicle. This is called a hydrocele
Inflammation of the epididymis. This is called epididymitis
Spermatic cord torsion. This is also called Testicular torsion. It is when the cord that the testicle hangs from gets twisted.
Varicocele - swollen veins to the testes. Varicocele happens more on the left.[1]
Loss and injury
Most boys are born with two testicles in the scrotum. The testicles have formed inside the baby's body, but moved into the scrotum before the birth. Sometimes one or both the testicles are still inside when the baby is born. Sometimes an operation is needed to fix this.
If a testicle is injured, it is extremely painful. Sometimes testicles get crushed. Sometimes it is necessary for a doctor to remove one or both the testicles. This operation is called an orchidectomy. If a man loses a testicle, a doctor can put a testicular prosthesis (false testicle) into the scrotum. It looks and feels like a testicle.
If a male loses both his testicles it's called castration. Because the man cannot produce sperm or testosterone, it has a big effect on the man's life. Because he cannot make sperm, he cannot have children. And because he cannot make the male hormone testosterone, he becomes less like a male. He may lose some of his muscles, and put on weight. A man who has lost his testicles may take testosterone medicine so that he does not have these changes.
Until the 1700s in Europe, and more recently in some countries, there was a custom to castrate young male slaves and boys. Young slaves were castrated so that they could be used as guards over the wives of rich men. It meant that the wives would not fall in love with their guards. Sometimes young boys who had beautiful singing voices were castrated before puberty. This meant that their voices would stay high all their lives. These singing men were called castrati.
Castrating animals
It is very common to castrate (remove the testicles from) male domestic animals. Male dogs and cats that are castrated do not fight so much, and do not stray around looking for females to mate with.
Male horses are usually castrated so that they become more calm and safer to ride. A castrated male horse is called a gelding. A male horse that is not castrated is a stallion.
Male animals that are used for meat are generally castrated because it makes them fatter and also makes them quieter to keep because they do not fight each other. Most male cattle are castrated.


== Other names for testicles ==
Testicles can also be called "testes" or "gonads".
There are many slang words for testicles, like balls, nuts, bollocks, nads, crown jewels, etc. Slang words are other names that are used for fun or to be vulgar (rude).


== Other pages ==
Cryptorchidism (cryptorchismus)
Infertility
List of homologues of the human reproductive system
Orchidometer
Spermatogenesis
Sterilization (surgical procedure), vasectomyThalassaemia (or thalassemia) is a genetic disorder of the blood which originated in the Mediterranean region.
This disease is caused by the weakening and destruction of red blood cells. This is caused by mutant genes which affect how the body makes haemoglobin. Haemoglobin is the protein in red blood cells which carries oxygen. People with thalassaemia make less haemoglobin and fewer circulating red blood cells than normal, which results in mild or severe anemia.
Thalassaemia can cause significant complications, including pneumonia, iron overload, bone deformities and cardiovascular illness. However, this inherited disease of red blood cells gives a degree of protection against malaria, which is or was common in the regions where the trait is common. This selective survival advantage for carriers (known as heterozygous advantage) is responsible for keeping the mutation in populations way above its mutation rate. Carriers are heterozygous for the thalassaemia allele, meaning only one of their two alleles is mutant (abnormal). There are a number of different versiona of thalassaemia. Each one is caused by a mutation in a different position in the genome.
In that respect, thalassaemia resembles another genetic disorder affecting haemoglobin, sickle-cell disease.
It is possible to cure patients with thalassaemia with bone marrow transplants from compatible donors. However, this method requires an HLA-matched compatible donor.


== References ==The throat is a part of the body. The throat is connected to the mouth at the top and to the stomach at the bottom. The throat is where food travels after being eaten and chewed by the teeth. Fluid drinks, such as water, also travel through the throat to the stomach and on to the rest of the body.Transsexual people change their sex. Some transsexual people go from male to female. Others go from female to male. They change how they look and act. They see doctors who can give them drugs and surgery. They change their name and sex through the law.
People who go from male to female (MTF) are transsexual women. People who go from female to male (FTM) are transsexual men.


== Ways to go from male to female ==
Transsexual women take female hormones. They may also take drugs that stop male hormones called androgens. Taking estrogen pills makes breasts grow. It does not make beards go away. It does not make voices higher. They remove their facial hair so it does not grow back. This takes a long time and hurts. Some transsexual women with low voices have surgery to raise them. Other transsexual women try to make their voice sound higher and more female without surgery. Some transsexual women also get surgery on their genitals. This is called a vaginoplasty. This is done by making a vagina from the skin of their penis, which is turned inside out. Some transsexual women also have surgery to make their faces look more feminine. Some also have surgery to make their breasts larger.


== Ways to go from female to male ==
Transsexual men take male hormones. This will make their voices lower. It will make a beard grow. It can also stop their menstruation. Some transsexual men look like any other man after hormones.
Some transsexual men have surgery. One surgery is removal of breasts (mastectomy). Some transsexual men also get surgery on their genitals. One surgery is removal of the uterus and ovaries (hysterectomy). Some may also get surgery on their outside genitals. One way takes their skin and tissue and makes it into a penis (phalloplasty). Another way takes the clitoris (which grows bigger with hormones) and puts it where the penis usually is (metoidioplasty). The place where urine comes out (urethra) can be run through the new penis. The phalloplasty looks more like a penis. A metoidioplasty has more sexual function, but it is 5 or 6 centimeters long. Some ways also make a scrotum from the labia. They may also have the vagina taken out or closed.


== Other websites ==
Gay and Lesbian Medical Association: Doctors who know about transsexual people.
World Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH): Doctors, lawyers, and therapists who know about transsexual people.
Tom Waddell Clinic A clinic that helps transsexual people.
Hormones for transsexual people: This helps doctors learn how to give hormones to transsexual people.


== Notes ==
Note 1: Lundstrom B, et al. “Outcome of sex reassignment surgery.” Acta Psychiat. Scandinavia. 70:289-294. 1984.
Note 2: Kuiper, M and Cohen-Kettenis, P. “Sex reassignment surgery: A study of 141 Dutch transsexuals.” Archives of Sexual Behavior. 17(5):439-457. 1988.Tuberculosis (TB) is an infectious disease caused by bacteria. In the past, people called it consumption.
TB is caused by several types of mycobacteria, usually Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The disease usually attacks the lungs, but it can also affect other parts of the body.


== How it spreads ==
The bacteria can travel through the air and spread from one person to the next. This happens when infected people cough, sneeze, or spit.
Of every 100 people with TB, between five and ten people show symptoms. In these people, the disease is called active. Tuberculosis kills more than half of the people who are infected if they do not get treatment.


== Detection and treatment ==

Diagnosis of active TB relies on radiology. Doctors often look at an X-ray of the chest. In addition, they check body fluids. These fluids have microbes in them, which are grown in cell cultures. The cell cultures are then analysed to see if the person is infected with TB.
If the patient has TB but does not show symptoms, the disease is 'latent'. Doctors use a skin test, called the Mantoux test, to detect latent TB. They often do blood tests too.
There is a vaccine against some forms of tuberculosis. It is called bacillus Calmette–Guérin vaccine.
TB used to be easily treated and cured with antibiotics. However, the bacterium is now highly resistant to most antibiotics. This resistance makes treatment difficult. Many different kinds of antibiotics need to be given over a long period of time. There is a form of tuberculosis that is resistant to all drugs.


== Symptoms ==
Tuberculosis can have many symptoms. The most common include:
A cough that does not go away, especially if the person is coughing up blood (this is called hemoptysis)
Chest pain
Not having any appetite
Weakness
Weight loss
Chills
Fever
Sweating a lot at night
Difficulty breathing
Feeling very tired
People are also more likely to get tuberculosis if they live close to other people who have TB. For example, TB can spread easily in homeless shelters, prisons, and immigrant communities.


== How common is TB? ==

Experts believe that one third of the world population is infected with M. tuberculosis. New infections occur at a rate of one per second. In 2007, about 13.7 million chronic cases were active globally. In 2010, about 8.8 million new cases developed and nearly 1.5 million people died from the disease, most of them in developing countries. The number of tuberculosis cases has been decreasing since 2006, and new cases have decreased since 2002.
Tuberculosis does not happen at the same rate around the world. About eighty percent of the population in many Asian and African countries test positive for TB, but only five to ten percent of people in the United States do.
People usually get tuberculosis because of a weakened immune system. Many people with HIV and AIDS can also get tuberculosis.


== References ==


== Other websites ==
Frequently asked Questions about TB at CDC.gov
ExplainTB: Multilingual audiovisual information on tuberculosisThe tympanic membrane, also called an eardrum, is a thin membrane that separates the external ear from the middle ear in humans and other animals. It moves sound from the air to the ossicles inside the middle ear. The malleus bone bridges the gap between the eardrum and the other ossicles.


== References ==Ureteral cancer is cancer of the ureters, muscular tubes that propel urine from the kidneys to the urinary bladder. It is also known as ureter cancer, renal pelvic cancer, and rarely ureteric cancer or uretal cancer. This kind of cancer is very rare.
Ureteral cancer is usually transitional cell carcinoma. Transitional cell carcinoma is "a common cause of ureter cancer and other urinary (renal pelvic) tract cancers."


== References ==Urethral cancer is cancer of the urethra. This cancer is very rare, and the most common type is papillary transitional cell carcinoma.


== References ==A urinary tract infection (UTI) is an infection caused by bacteria in part of the urinary tract. In the lower urinary tract, it is known as a simple cystitis (a bladder infection). In the upper urinary tract, it is known as pyelonephritis (a kidney infection). Symptoms from a lower urinary tract infection include painful peeing and either frequent peeing or wanting to pee (or both). Symptoms of a kidney infection also include fever and side and back pain. In old people and young children, the symptoms are not always as clear. The main cause for both types is the bacteria Escherichia coli. Other bacteria, viruses, or fungus may be the cause in rare cases.
Women get urinary tract infections more often than men. Half of women have an infection at some point in their lives. It is common to have repeated infections. Risk factors include sexual intercourse as well as family history. Sometimes a person who had a bladder infection will get a kidney infection. Kidney infection also can be caused by bacteria in the blood. Diagnosis in young healthy women can be based on symptoms alone. Sometimes, the urine needs to be tested. A person with frequent infections can take low-dose antibiotics to prevent future infections.
Antibiotics are used to treat simple cases of urinary tract infections. resistance to many of the antibiotics used to treat this condition, however, is increasing. People who have complicated urinary tract infections sometimes have to take antibiotics for a longer time, or might take antibiotics intravenously (through the veins). If symptoms have not improved in two or three days, a person will need further tests. In women, urinary tract infections are the most common form of bacterial infection. Ten percent of women develop urinary tract infections yearly.


== Signs and symptoms ==

Lower urinary tract infection is also known as a bladder infection. The most common symptoms are burning with peeing and having to pee frequently (or wanting to pee) without vaginal discharge or significant pain. These symptoms can vary from mild to severe. In healthy women, the symptoms last an average of six days. Some people will have pain above the pubic bone (lower abdomen) or in the lower back. People who have an upper urinary tract infection, or pyelonephritis (a kidney infection), can have flank pain, fever (a high temperature), or nausea and vomiting. Those symptoms are in addition to the normal symptoms of a lower urinary tract infection. In rare cases the urine looks bloody or contains visible pyuria (pus in the urine).


=== In children ===
In young children, fever can be the only symptom of a urinary tract infection (UTI). Many medical associations recommend a urine culture for females younger than two year old or uncircumcised males who are younger than a year and have a fever. Infants with UTI sometimes eat poorly, vomit, sleep more, or show signs of jaundice ( a yellow coloring of the skin). Older children can have new urinary incontinence (loss of bladder control).


=== In the elderly ===
Urinary tract symptoms are frequently not seen in those who are old. Sometimes, the only symptoms are incontinence (loss of bladder control), a change in mental status (ability to think), or feeling tired. The first symptom for some old people is sepsis, an infection of the blood. Diagnosis can be difficult because many old people are incontinent (cannot hold their pee) or have dementia (poor thinking abilities).


== Cause ==
E. coli is the cause of 80–85% of urinary tract infections. Staphylococcus saprophyticus is the cause in 5–10% of cases. In rare cases, viral or fungal infections cause urinary tract infections Other bacterial causes of UTI include:
Klebsiella
Proteus
Pseudomonas,
Enterobacter
These bacterial causes are not common and usually happen when the person has an abnormal urinary system or the person has a urinary catheterization (tube inserted into the bladder. Urinary tract infections due toStaphylococcus aureus usually happens after the person has had a blood infection.


=== Gender ===
Sexual intercourse is the cause of 75–90% of bladder infections in young, sexually active women. The risk of infection is related to how often they have sex. With UTIs so frequent when women first get married, the term "honeymoon cystitis" is often used. In post-menopausal women (women who have stopped menstruating), sexual activity does not affect the risk of developing a UTI. Using spermicide (a gel or cream to kill sperm) increases the risk of UTIs.
Women get more UTIs than men because women have a urethra that is much shorter and closer to the anus. As a woman's estrogen (a hormone) levels decrease with menopause, the risk of urinary tract infections increases due to the loss of protective vaginal flora (good bacterial that live in the vagina).


=== Urinary catheters ===
A urinary catheter is a tube that is put into the bladder to drain the urine. Using a catheter increases the risk for urinary tract infections. The risk of bacteriuria (bacteria in the urine) is 3% - 6% every day the catheter is used. Antibiotics do not stop these infections. The risk of an infection can be decreased by:
using a catheter only when necessary
making sure everything is very clean (sterile) when putting the catheter in
making sure that nothing blocks the catheter.


=== Others ===
Bladder infections are more common in some families. Other risk factors include diabetes, being circumcised, and having a large prostate (a gland around the urethra in males). Complicating factors are not completely clear. These factors may include some anatomic problems (relating to physical narrowing), functional, or metabolic problems. A complicated UTI is more difficult to treat and usually needs more aggressive evaluation, treatment, and follow-up. In children, UTIs are linked to vesicoureteral reflux (an abnormal movement of urine from the bladder into ureters or kidneys) and constipation.


== Mechanism ==
The bacteria that cause urinary tract infections usually go into the bladder from the uretha. It is believed these bacteria come from the bowel. Females are at greater risk because they have a short urethra that is close to their anus). After entering the bladder, E. Coli are able to stick to the bladder wall. They form a biofilm, which is a coating of microorganisms, that resists the body's immune response. However, infections can also come through the blood or lymph.


== Prevention ==
The following activities do not cause a UTI or make them happen less frequently:
using birth-control pills or condoms
peeing immediately after sex
the type of underwear worn
personal cleaning methods used after peeing or defecating
whether a person usually bathes or showers.
holding onto urine and not peeing
tampon use
douching
People who often get UTIs and who use spermicide or a diaphragm for birth control should use a different type of birth control. Cranberry (juice or capsules) may decrease the number of infections, but some people cannot use cranberries for long periods of time. Gastrointestinal (stomach) upset occurs in more than 30% of people who regularly drink cranberry juice or take capsules. As of 2011, probiotics used intravaginally (in the vagina) require further study to determine if they are helpful.


=== Medications ===
For people who keep getting infections, taking antibiotics for a long time is helpful. Drugs frequently used include nitrofurantoin and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. If infections are related to sexual intercourse, some women find it useful to taking antibiotics after sex. In post-menopausal women, using topical vaginal estrogen (a hormone applied to the skin of the vaginal) has been found to reduce getting a UTI. Unlike topical creams, the use of vaginal estrogen from pessaries (medical devices put in the vagina is not as useful as low-dose antibiotics. A number of vaccines are being developed (as of 2011).


=== In children ===
There is little evidence that using preventative antibiotics decreases urinary tract infections in children. It is rare for people who have no problems with their kidneys to develop kidney problems from frequent UTIs. Having frequent urinary tract infections as a child causes less than a third of a percent (0.33%) of chronic kidney disease in adults.


== Diagnosis ==

In most cases, UTIs can be diagnosed just from the symptoms and there is no need for laboratory testing. Urinalysis (testing the urine) can be used to confirm the diagnosis in complicated cases. The urine is tested for urinary nitrites, white blood cells (leukocytes), or leukocyte esterase. Another test, urine microscopy, looks for red blood cells, white blood cells, or bacteria. Urine culture is considered positive if it shows a bacterial colony count of greater than or equal to 103 colony-forming units per mL of a typical bacteria that causes infections of the urinary tract. Cultures can also be used to test which antibiotic will work. However, women with negative cultures can still improve with antibiotic treatment. UTI symptoms in old people can be vague, and diagnosis can be difficult as there is no really reliable test.


=== Classification ===
A urinary tract infection in the lower urinary tract is known as a bladder infection. A UTI in the upper urinary tract is known as pyelonephritis or kidney infection. If the urine has significant bacteria, but there are no symptoms, the condition is known as asymtomatic bacteriuria.
A urinary tract infection is said to be complicated if:
it is in the upper tract
the person has diabetes mellitus
the person is pregnant
the person is male
the person has a weakened immune system (immunocompromised) because of another illness.
Otherwise if a women is a healthy and before menopause, the infection is said to be uncomplicated. When children also have a fever, the urinary tract infection is considered to be an upper urinary tract infection.


=== In children ===
To diagnose a urinary tract infection in children, a positive urinary culture is required. Contamination poses a frequent challenge so a cutoff of 105 CFU/mL is used for a "clean-catch" mid-stream sample, 104 CFU/mL is used for catheter-obtained specimens, and 102 CFU/mL is used for suprapubic aspirations (a sample drawn directly from the bladder through the stomach wall with a needle). The World Health Organization does not like the use of “urine bags” to collect samples because there is a high rate of contamination when that urine is cultured. Catheterization is preferred if an individual is unable to use a toilet. Some medical groups, such as the American Academy of Pediatrics, recommend renal ultrasound and voiding cystourethrogram (watching a person's urethra and urinary bladder with real time X-rays while they urinate) in all children who are younger than 2 years old and have had a urinary tract infection.Other medical groups such as the National Institute for Clinical Excellence recommend routine imaging only in babies younger than 6 months old or who have unusual findings.


=== Differential diagnosis ===
In women with cervicitis (inflammation of the cervix) or vaginitis (inflammation of the vagina) and in young men with UTI symptoms, a Chlamydia trachomatis or Neisseria gonorrheae infection may be the cause. Vaginitis may also be due to a yeast infection. Interstitial cystitis (chronic pain in the bladder) can be the cause for people who have UTI symptoms many times, but whose urine cultures remain negative and do not improved with antibiotics. Prostatitis (inflammation of the prostate) may also be considered in the differential diagnosis.


== Treatment ==
Phenazopyridine can be used in addition to antibiotics to help ease the burning pain of a bladder infection. However, phenazopyridine is no longer commonly recommended due to safety concerns. It can cause methemoglobinemia, which means there is higher than normal level of methemoglobin in the blood. Acetaminophen can be used for fevers.
Women who keep getting simple UTIs can benefit from self-treatment; these women should get medical treatment medical only if the initial treatment fails. Health care providers may also prescribe the antibiotics by phone.


=== Uncomplicated ===
Simple infections can be diagnosed and treated based on symptoms alone. Oral antibiotics such as trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX), cephalosporins, nitrofurantoin, or a fluoroquinolone will shorten the time to recovery. All these drugs are equally effective. A three-day treatment with trimethoprim, TMP/SMX, or a fluoroquinolone is usually enough. Nitrofurantoin needs 5–7 days. With treatment, symptoms should improve within 36 hours. About 50% of people will get better without treatment within a few days or weeks. The Infectious Diseases Society of America does not recommend fluoroquinolones as first treatment because of concerns that overuse will lead to resistance to this class of drugs, making these drugs less effective for more serious infections. Despite this precaution, some resistance has developed to all of these drugs because to their widespread use. In some countries, trimethoprim alone is deemed to be equivalent to TMP/SMX. Children with simple UTIs are often helped by a three-day course of antibiotics.


=== Pyelonephritis ===
Pyelonephritis (kidney infection) is treated more aggressively than a simple bladder infection using either a longer course of oral antibiotics or intravenous antibiotics. Seven days of the oral fluoroquinolone ciprofloxacin is typically used in geographic areas where the resistance rate is less than 10%. If the local resistance rates are greater than 10%, a dose of intravenous ceftriaxone often is prescribed. People with more severe symptoms are sometimes admitted a hospital for ongoing antibiotics. If symptoms do not improve following two or three days of treatment, it can mean that the urinary tract is blocked by a kidney stone.


== Likelihood ==
Urinary tract infections are the most frequent bacterial infection in women. They occur most frequently between the ages of 16 and 35 years. Ten percent of women get an infection yearly; 60% have an infection at some point in their lives. Nearly half of people get a second infection within a year. Urinary tract infections occur four times more frequently in females than males. Pyelonephritis (a kidney infection) occurs between 20–30 times less frequently than bladder infections. Pyelonephritis is the most common cause of hospital acquired infections, accounting for approximately 40% of hospital-acquired infections. Rates of asymptomatic bacteria in the urine increase with age from 2% to 7% in women of childbearing age to as high as 50% in elderly women in care homes. Rates of aysmtomatic bacteria in the urine among men over 75 are 7-10%.
Urinary tract infections can affect 10% of people during childhood. Urinary tract infections in children are the most common in uncircumcised males younger than 3 months of age, followed by females younger than one year. Estimates of frequency among children, however, vary widely. In a group of children with a fever, ranging in age between birth and 2 years, 2- 20% were diagnosed with a UTI.


== Society and culture ==
In the United States, urinary tract infections lead to nearly seven million office visits, a million emergency department visits, and 100,000 hospitalizations every year. The cost of these infections is high due to both lost time at work and costs of medical care. The direct cost of treatment is estimated at 1.6 billion USD yearly in the United States.


== History ==
Urinary tract infections have been described since ancient times. The first written description, found in the Ebers Papyrus, dates to around the 1550 BC. The Egyptians described a urinary tract infection as "sending forth heat from the bladder." Herbs, bloodletting, and rest were the common treatments until the 1930s, when antibiotics became available.


== In pregnancy ==
Pregnant women with UTIs have a higher risk of kidney infections.During pregnancy, high progesterone (a hormone) levels decreased muscle tone of the ureters and bladder. Decreased muscle tone leads to a greater likelihood of reflux, where urine flows back up the ureters and toward the kidneys. If bacteria are present, pregnant women have a 25-40% risk of a kidney infection. Thus treatment is recommended if urine testing shows signs of an infection—even in the absence of symptoms. Cephalexin or nitrofurantoin are typically used because those medications are generally considered safe in pregnancy. A kidney infection during pregnancy may result in premature birth or pre-eclampsia (a state of high blood pressure, kidney dysfunction, or seizures).


== References ==Vaginal cancer is a type of cancer that forms in the tissues of the vagina. Primary vaginal cancer is rare in the general population of women. Metastases are more common. Vaginal cancer occurs more often in women over age 50, but can occur at any age, even in when they're pregnant. It often can be cured if found and treated in its early stages. Surgery alone or surgery combined with pelvic radiation is typically used to treat vaginal cancer.
There are two primary types of vaginal cancer: squamous-cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma.


== References ==Vasculitis (plural: vasculitides) is a group of disorders that destroy blood vessels by inflammation. Both arteries and veins are affected. Lymphangitis is sometimes considered a type of vasculitis. Vasculitis is primarily caused by leukocyte migration and resultant damage.
Although both occur in vasculitis, inflammation of veins (phlebitis) or arteries (arteritis) on their own are separate entities.


== References ==The vas deferens (or ductus deferens)  is a duct in a man’s body. It is also present in other male vertebrates. Its function is to carry sperm away from the testes, towards the penis.
There are two of these ducts, which are tubes surrounded by smooth muscle. They connect the left and right epididymis to the ejaculatory ducts in order to move sperm. Each tube is about 30 centimeters long. During ejaculation the smooth muscle in the wall of the vas deferens contracts. That pushes the sperm toward the penis. The sperm go from the vas deferens into the urethra. Other male sex glands push out at the same time.


== Vasectomy ==
There is a surgery called vasectomy that is a method of contraception. The two vasa deferentia (Latin plural) are cut and sealed, so the sperm cannot get out of the body. This is usually permanent, but in some cases it can be reversed. Sometimes instead of cutting the vas deferentia, the surgeon puts something to block the sperm instead of cutting them.


== Related pages ==
Cystic fibrosis


== Notes ==The ventricles are hollow spaces in the human brain. They contain cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). There are four ventricles in a human brain. This is the ventricular system. It is a continuation of the central canal of the spinal cord. The ventricle lining is an epithelium-like membrane. The ventricles are interconnected, allowing the flow of cerebrospinal fluid. CSF is produced by cells of the lining.Ventricular fibrillation (often shortened to VF or V-Fib) is a type of arrhythmia of the heart. "Arrhythmia" means the heart is not beating normally.


== What is Ventricular Fibrillation? ==
When a person is in ventricular fibrillation, the heart does not beat in any kind of pattern. Instead, it quivers and twitches very quickly.
This problem is called "ventricular" fibrillation because it affects the ventricles of the heart. The ventricles are the biggest parts of the heart. Their job is to pump blood (which carries oxygen) to the lungs and the rest of the body. When a person is in ventricular fibrillation, the ventricles cannot do this job. This means that the lungs, brain, and other organs will not get enough blood or oxygen.
Ventricular fibrillation is a medical emergency. Without enough blood and oxygen, no part of the body can survive. If ventricular fibrillation continues for long enough, the blood will stop circulating around the body. The person's breathing and heart will stop. The person will die unless they get treatment quickly.


== Treatment ==
Ventricular fibrillation can be stopped by shocking the person with electricity from a defibrillator. If a defibrillator is not available, CPR (cardiopulmonary resuscitation) should be done to keep the blood flowing until an ambulance comes or a defibrillator is available.
Doctors or paramedics can also give special medicines called anti-arrhythmic medicines, which can make the heart start beating normally again. Some common anti-arrhythmic medicines are amiodarone and lidocaine.
If a person with ventricular fibrillation is treated right away, treatment is 90% successful (it works in 9 out of 10 people). But treatment gets 10% less successful after every minute (so if treatment starts after one minute, it will work in only 8 out of 10 people. After 5 minutes, it will work in only 4 out of 10 people.) So getting treatment as soon as possible is very important. If a person cannot be treated with medicine or a defibrillator right away, CPR will help keep blood and oxygen flowing through the person's body until treatment arrives.
In patients who are very likely to keep having ventricular fibrillation, a special defibrillator can be put into their chest by a surgeon. (This special defibrillator is called an "implantable cardioverter-defibrillator.") Any time the person goes into ventricular fibrillation, the defibrillator will give the person's heart an electric shock, to bring the heart back into a normal rhythm.Ventricular tachycardia (V-tach or VT) is a type of tachycardia (a fast heart rate). The heart has four chambers (closed spaces). The top two are called the atria, and the bottom two are called the ventricles. When the heart is working normally, electrical signals in the heart tell the to atria squeeze first. However, in ventricular tachycardia, the ventricles squeeze first. This happens because the electrical signals that tell the atria to squeeze first are not working.
Ventricular tachycardia is a medical emergency. First of all, if the heart is beating too fast, it does not have time to refill with blood between beats. This means that the heart will not be able to squeeze out enough blood to the rest of the body. Most people in ventricular tachycardia have a heart rate of at least 170 beats per minute. This is very fast. (A normal heart rate is 60-100.)
Ventricular tachycardia can also cause low blood pressure. If the blood pressure gets low enough, important parts of the body, like the brain, will not get enough blood and oxygen to survive.
Ventricular tachycardia can also lead to ventricular fibrillation, asystole (where the heart stops beating), and sudden death.


== Symptoms ==
The most common symptoms of ventricular tachycardia are feeling dizzy, having palpitations (feeling the heart pounding inside the chest), having trouble breathing, or chest pain. Some people with ventricular tachycardia do not have any symptoms, especially if the V-tach lasts for only a few seconds.
When a person's heart rate is very high, or the ventricular tachycardia lasts for more than a few seconds, the person may faint or become unconscious because their brain is not getting enough blood and oxygen. In the worst cases, their heart may stop, or they may die.


== Diagnosis ==

A doctor can diagnose ventricular tachycardia by doing an electrocardiogram (also called an ECG or an EKG). This is a test that shows the electrical activity in the heart. The doctor will be able to see that the electrical signals that tell the atria to squeeze first are not working.


== Treatment ==
Ventricular tachycardia can be treated in a few different ways. Treatment depends on whether the patient still has a pulse. If the patient is in pulseless ventricular tachycardia, their heart is beating so fast that it cannot squeeze out any blood.


=== Cardioversion ===
If a person still has a pulse, ventricular tachycardia can usually be stopped through cardioversion. Cardioversion means using medication or an electric shock to make the heart start beating normally again.


=== Defibrillation ===
If a person has pulseless ventricular tachycardia, they need to be shocked with a defibrillator.
Two different types of defibrillators can be used. An external defibrillator is a machine that delivers a shock through two sticky pads that are placed on the person's chest.
However, some people who have already been diagnosed with V-tach have surgery to put a defibrillator inside their chest. This is called an implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD). This type of defibrillator shocks the heart automatically when it goes into V-tach.


==== First aid ====
If a person goes into pulseless ventricular tachycardia, first aid can be helpful. 9-1-1 or the local emergency telephone number should be called immediately. Then - like in any situation where a person suddenly becomes unconscious and has no pulse - cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) should be started right away. An emergency medical dispatcher can help explain how to do CPR until an ambulance gets there.


== Causes ==
Ventricular tachycardia can be caused by many different things. The most common cause is ischemic heart disease (heart disease that causes the heart to not get enough oxygen).
Ventricular tachycardia can also be caused by other problems, like:
Cardiomyopathies (diseases that affect the heart muscle)
Diseases like sarcoidosis and rheumatoid arthritis that can affect the whole body, if they attack the heart muscle
Problems with electrolytes, like not having enough potassium, calcium, or magnesium
Illegal drugs like methamphetamine or cocaine
Certain kinds of medications
Sometimes doctors cannot find a cause for ventricular tachycardia. This is called idiopathic ventricular tachycardia.


== Prognosis ==
Ventricular tachycardia causes most of the sudden cardiac deaths in the United States. It causes about 300,000 deaths every year.
The chance of sudden death is highest for people who:
Have ischemic cardiomyopathy (their heart muscle was damaged by not getting enough oxygen); and
Have ventricular tachycardia that comes and goes
The chance of sudden death is lowest for people with idiopathic ventricular tachycardia.
Even for high-risk people, treatment with medications like beta blockers can help. So can implantable cardio-defibrillators.


== Related pages ==
Cardiac arrhythmia
Tachycardia


== References ==In human anatomy, the appendix (other names vermiform appendix; cecal (or caecal) appendix; vermix) is a blind ended tube connected to the cecum (or caecum).
The caecum is a pouch-like part of the colon. The appendix is near the junction of the small intestine and the large intestine. The term "vermiform" comes from Latin and means "worm-like in appearance".
The appendix has no function in humans, but it can cause diseases (like appendicitis). In us, it is a vestigial organ.
Darwin suggested that the appendix was perhaps used to digest leaves as primates. Over time, humans have eaten fewer vegetables and have evolved. Over thousands of years, this organ has become smaller to make room for the stomach. It is a vestigial organ which has degraded to nearly nothing in the course of evolution.
Herbivorous mammals such as the Koala have large appendices, and usually other adaptations as well. Cellulose, from plant cell walls, is hard to break down. The cecum of the koala is attached to the juncture of the small and large intestines as it is in humans, but is very long. This enables it to host bacteria specific for cellulose breakdown.
Early man’s ancestor may have also relied upon this system and lived on a diet rich in foliage. As man began to eat foods easier to digest, they became less reliant on cellulose-rich plants for energy.


== Reservoir of gut flora ==
Recent work shows the appendix is a safe place for useful bacteria when illness flushes those bacteria from the rest of the intestines. This proposal is based on a new understanding of how the immune system supports the growth of beneficial gut flora, in combination with many well-known features of the appendix, including its architecture, its location just below the normal one-way flow of food and germs in the large intestine, and its association with copious amounts of immune tissue. Research performed at Winthrop University-Hospital showed that individuals without an appendix were four times more likely to have a recurrence of Clostridium difficile colitis. The appendix, therefore, may act as a "safe house" for commensal ("good") bacteria. This reservoir of gut flora could then serve to repopulate the digestive system following a bout of dysentery or cholera.


== References ==Vertigo: a person feels as if the world around them is spinning, or that they are spinning, or the spinning is in their head. Vertigo can be caused by different medical conditions; when it happens because of a migraine it is called migraine-associated vertigo. It may happen before a migraine headache starts or during the headache, but vertigo is most common during the period of time between headaches. Many people who have migraines have vertigo or dizziness as the main symptom instead of a headache.
There are different way of vertigo associated with migraines, making a person feel; from feeling lightheaded or:
Episodic true vertigo:
Positional vertigo: which happens when a person holds their head in a certain positions.
Constant imbalance:
Movement associated dysequilibrium: different types of movement may cause vertigo.


== References ==Viral hemorrhagic fever is the name for a number of diseases. They often include fever and bleeding. They are caused by viruses. These fevers are one of the possible causes of the Black Death (most people think it is the bubonic plague).


== References ==Vulvar cancer, a type of cancer of the vulva. It accounts for about 4% of all gynecological cancers and typically affects women in later life. It was estimated that in the United States 3,740 cases were diagnosed and about 880 women died as a result. Vulvar carcinoma is separated from vulvar intraepithelial neoplasia (VIN), a non-invasive lesion of the epithelium that can progress via carcinoma-in-situ to squamous cell cancer, and from Paget disease of the vulva.


== References ==Webbed toes is the common name for syndactyly. Webbed feet happens when two or more toes grow together instead of separately. This is common in many birds such as ducks. It is also common in amphibians such as frogs and mammals such as kangaroos. In humans, it is not normal. It only happens to 3-10 in 10,000 live births.


== Famous people with webbed feet ==
Dan Aykroyd – Canada, actor
Jacqui Hurley - Ireland, sports broadcaster
Ashton Kutcher - United States, actor
Joseph Stalin – Soviet Union, General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union


== References ==


== Books ==
Man LX, Chang B (January 2006). "Maternal cigarette smoking during pregnancy increases the risk of having a child with a congenital digital anomaly". Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery 117 (1): 301–8. doi:10.1097/01.prs.0000194904.81981.71. PMID 16404282.Wilms' tumor, also known as Nephroblastoma, is a form of kidney cancer that occurs most often in children. It has an excellent prognosis, with 90% of patients living for more than five years after being diagnosed.


== Treatment ==
In general, Wilms' tumor is curable. If the tumor is only in the kidney, it can be removed along with the whole kidney. This procedure is called a nephrectomy. During the operation, the surgeon checks if the other kidney has a tumor. If there are tumors in both kidneys, a piece of the tumor will be removed. After the surgery, the child is given some chemotherapy drugs like Dactinomycin. This drug is also known by its trade name Cosmegen.
Both operation and chemotherapy is sometimes used.


== References ==Wolff–Parkinson–White syndrome is a condition involving the human heart. WPW is caused by the presence of an abnormal pathway between the atria and the ventricles.
Sudden cardiac death in people with WPW is rare. Some people may experience low blood pressure with WPW.


== References ==Yaws is a tropical infection of the skin, bones and joints. It is caused by the spirochaete bacterium Treponema pallidum pertenue.
The disease begins with a round, hard swelling of the skin, two to five centimeters in diameter. The center may break open and form an ulcer. This usually heals after three to six months. After several weeks, or even years later, the joints and bones may become painful, fatigue may develop, and new skin sores may appear. The skin of the palms of the hands and the soles of the feet may become thick and break open. The bones (especially those of the nose) may change shape. After five years or more large areas of skin can die. This leaves large scars.
Yaws is spread by touching the fluid from the sores of a person with the disease. The disease is most common among children, who spread it by playing together.
Other similar diseases are caused by different strains of the same bacterium, such as syphilis (Treponema pallidum pallidum). Once the lesions have appeared doctors are able to tell it is yaws. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is the best method of diagnosis.
The main way of stopping the disease spreading, is by curing those who have it. This stops them passing it on to others. Where the disease is common, treating the entire community is effective. Improving cleanliness and sanitation will also decrease spread. Yaws can be treated with antibiotics. Without treatment, physical deformities happen in 10% of cases.
Yaws is common in at least 14 tropical countries as of 2012. The disease infects only humans. In the 1950s and 1960s the World Health Organization (WHO) nearly destroyed yaws. Since then the number of cases has increased.
One of the first descriptions of the disease was made in 1679 by Willem Piso. Archaeology shows that yaws may have been present among humans as far back as 1.6 million years ago.


== References ==Zika fever is an illness caused by the Zika virus. The Zika virus belongs to the genus Flavivirus, like dengue fever and chikungunya. However, Zika fever is usually not as bad as those illnesses. Most people who get the Zika virus (60-80%) have no symptoms.
People who do have symptoms usually have a low fever, conjunctivitis, joint pain (mainly in the hands and feet), and a rash. The rash often starts on the face and then spreads to the rest of the body. Usually, the symptoms are not very bad, and get better after 2 to 7 days.
Starting in 2015, there has been an outbreak of Zika virus (meaning that many people have gotten the virus) in Brazil. Scientists think that when a woman with the Zika virus is pregnant, she can give the virus to her fetus. Scientists think this can cause microcephaly, a birth defect that causes a baby to have a smaller head than usual. This can cause intellectual disability and other problems in the brain, like seizures. Because of this, in January 2016, the United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention warned pregnant women not to travel to Brazil, Colombia, El Salvador, French Guiana, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Martinique, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay, Suriname, Venezuela, or Puerto Rico, because of the risk of getting the Zika virus there.
In places where the Zika virus lives, people are more likely to have birth defects, neurological problems like Guillain-Barré syndrome, and autoimmune diseases.


== Diagnosis ==
Diagnosing Zika fever is difficult for a few reasons. First, Zika fever causes many of the same signs and symptoms as many other viruses.
Second, special laboratory tests have to be done to prove that a person has Zika virus. For example, when the virus is in a person's blood or urine, it can be found by using a special test that looks for the virus's RNA in the blood. However, the Zika virus often does not stay in the blood for very long. Also, because most people with the Zika virus have no symptoms, they do not know that they need to be tested. Blood tests that look for specific antibodies (which the body sends out to fight the Zika virus) can also be done. However, these tests are expensive and have to be done in special laboratories that do not exist everywhere.
If tests cannot prove that a person has Zika virus, it can be difficult to figure out whether a person has Zika fever or a different infection. The United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) says that before doctors diagnose a person with Zika fever, they should think about whether the person could have one of many other infections. Examples of these infections include:
Dengue fever
West Nile virus
Chikungunya
Malaria
Rubella
Measles
Leptospirosis


== Transmission ==
Humans get the Zika virus after being bitten by mosquitoes from the Aedes genus. Scientists have proven that at least eight different species of mosquitoes from the Aedes genus can spread the Zika virus to humans. Mosquitoes pick up the Zika virus after they bite other animals that have the virus.
Zika virus can be passed from one person to another during sexual intercourse. It can also be passed from a mother to her fetus during pregnancy.


== Prevention ==

There is no vaccine for Zika virus, though the United States National Institutes of Health is trying to make one.
The best way for a person to protect themselves against the Zika virus is to protect themselves against mosquitoes. For example, if people are traveling to places where the Zika virus lives, they should:
Wear long-sleeved shirts and long pants
Use bug spray
Stay and sleep in rooms that are protected by window and door screens, and that have air conditioning (if possible)
Use a mosquito net when sleeping


== Treatment ==
Today, there is no treatment or cure for Zika fever. Medical professionals can only give "supportive care," which means they can only treat the virus's symptoms. For example, they can give medicines to help with pain, fever, and itching. However, some scientists say that doctors should not give medicines like aspirin and other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), which are commonly used for pain and fever. This is because people with similar viruses who take these medicines have been more likely to have bleeding problems.
There are no known anti-viral medications (medicines which kill viruses) which will kill the Zika virus.
Because there are no treatments that will cure the Zika virus once a person has it, scientists suggest that pregnant women do everything they can to avoid getting the virus. Once a pregnant woman has the Zika virus, there is nothing anyone can do to keep her fetus from getting infected too.


== Epidemiology ==
Zika fever was first discovered in 1947, in a rhesus monkey in the Zika Forest in Uganda. The first human cases were reported in Nigeria in 1954. A few outbreaks have been reported in tropical Africa and in some parts of Southeast Asia., but not India. In 1977–1978, Zika virus caused fevers in Indonesia.

The first major outbreak happened in 2007 in Micronesia's Yap Islands. 185 people were proven to have the Zika virus. This was the first time Zika fever had been reported outside Africa and Asia. In 2013, another large outbreak happened in French Polynesia.
In May 2015, Brazil officially reported its first 16 cases of Zika fever. By November 2015, Zika fever had appeared in 14 states in Brazil. Zika virus is thought to have caused 2,400 cases of microcephaly and 29 infant deaths in Brazil in 2015.
Since first appearing in the Western Hemisphere in February 2014, Zika fever has spread quickly throughout South America and Central America. It appeared in Mexico in November 2015.
On January 24, 2016, the World Health Organization warned that the Zika virus is likely to spread to nearly all countries of the Americas. This is likely since the mosquito that spreads the virus, Aedes aegypti, lives in all of the countries in the Americas, except for Canada and Chile.
On February 1, 2016, the World Health Organization said that the Zika virus was a "public health emergency." They also said the Zika virus was "spreading explosively" (very quickly), and that in the next year, as many as 3 million to 4 million people could get the virus.


== Related pages ==
Flaviviruses
Aedes genus of mosquitoes
Aedes agypti

Infectious disease


== References ==